2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 1/59
World War I
From top to bottom, left to right:
French attack at the Battle of Verdun, 1916 ·
German soldiers manning a machine gun
during the Second Battle of the Somme, 1918
· British Bristol F.2 Fighters during the German
spring offensive, 1918 · Aftermath of the Siege
of Przemyśl in Austria-Hungary, 1915 ·
Ottoman Arab camel corps leaving for the
Middle Eastern front, 1916 · Bulgarian troops
during the Monastir offensive, 1916
World War I
World War I
[j] or the First World War (28 July 1914
– 11 November 1918) was a global conflict fought
between two coalitions: the Allies and the Central
Powers. Battles took place throughout Europe, the
Middle East, Africa, the Pacific, and parts of Asia. One of
the deadliest wars in history, it ultimately resulted in an
estimated 9 million soldiers dead and 23  million
wounded, plus another 5  million civilian deaths from
numerous causes. Millions more died as a result of
genocide, and the war was a major factor in the 1918
Spanish flu pandemic.
Increasing diplomatic tensions between the European
great powers reached a breaking point on 28 June 1914,
when a Bosnian Serb named Gavrilo Princip
assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the
Austro-Hungarian throne. Austria-Hungary held Serbia
responsible, and declared war on 28 July. Russia came
to Serbia's defence, and by 4 August, Germany, France,
and Britain were drawn into the war, with the Ottoman
Empire joining in November of the same year.
Germany's strategy in 1914 was to first defeat France,
then transfer forces to the Russian front. However, this
failed, and by the end of 1914, the Western Front
consisted of a continuous line of trenches stretching
from the English Channel to Switzerland. The Eastern
Front was more dynamic, but neither side could gain a
decisive advantage, despite costly offensives. As the war
expanded to more fronts, Bulgaria, Italy, Romania,
Greece and others joined in from 1915 onward.
In early 1917, the United States entered the war on the
Allies' side, and later the same year, the Bolsheviks
seized power in the Russian October Revolution, making
peace with the Central Powers in early 1918. Germany
launched an offensive in the west in March 1918, and
despite initial successes, it left the German Army
exhausted and demoralised. A successful Allied counteroffensive later that year caused a collapse of the German
frontline. By the end of 1918, Bulgaria, the Ottoman
Empire and Austria-Hungary agreed to armistices with
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 2/59
the Allies, leaving Germany isolated. Facing revolution
at home and with his army on the verge of mutiny,
Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated on 9 November.
Fighting ended with the Armistice of 11 November 1918,
while the subsequent Paris Peace Conference imposed
various settlements on the defeated powers, notably the
Treaty of Versailles. The dissolution of the Russian,
German, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman Empires
resulted in the creation of new independent states,
including Poland, Finland, Czechoslovakia, and
Yugoslavia. The inability to manage post-war instability
contributed to the outbreak of World War  II in
September 1939.
The term world war was first coined in September 1914
by German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel. He
claimed that "there is no doubt that the course and
character of the feared 'European War'  ... will become
the first world war in the full sense of the word,"[1] in
The Indianapolis Star on 20 September 1914.
The term First World War had been used by Lt-Col.
Charles à Court Repington, as a title for his 1920
memoirs; he had noted his discussion on the matter with
a Major Johnstone of Harvard University in his diary
entry of 10 September 1918.[2][3]
Prior to World War II, the events of 1914–1918 were
generally known as the Great War or simply the
World War.
[4]
In August 1914, the magazine The
Independent wrote "This is the Great War. It names
itself".[5]
In October 1914, the Canadian magazine
Maclean's similarly wrote, "Some wars name
themselves. This is the Great War."[6] Contemporary
Europeans also referred to it as "the war to end war"
and it was also described as "the war to end all wars"
due to their perception of its unparalleled scale,
devastation, and loss of life.[7]
Names
Background
Political and military alliances
2
/
2
4
/
2
4
,
2:2
5
P
M
Wo
r
l
d
Wa
r
I
-
Wi
k
i
p
e
d
i
a
h
t
t
p
s:/
/
e
n.w
i
k
i
p
e
d
i
a.o
r
g
/
w
i
k
i
/
Wo
r
l
d
_
Wa
r_
I
3
/
5
9
Riv
al milit
a
r
y
c
o
alitio
n
s in
1
9
1
4:[
k
]
T
riple
E
n
t
e
n
t
e
T
riple
Allia
n
c
e
For much of the 19th
century, the major
European powers
maintained
a
tenuous balance of
power, known as the
Concert of Europe
.
[
8
]
After 1848, this was
challenged by
Britain's withdrawal
into so-called
splendid isolation
,
the decline of the
Ottoman Empire, New Imperialism, and the rise of
Prussia under Otto von Bismarck. The 1866 AustroPrussian War established Prussian hegemony in German
states, while victory in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian
War allowed Bismarck to consolidate a German
Empire
under Prussian leadership. Avenging the defeat of 1871,
or revanchism, and recovering the provinces of AlsaceLorraine became an obsession of French policy and
public opinion for the following few years,
[
9
] yet since
the 1880s this concern was eclipsed by the conquest of
a
vast colonial empire, and had disappeared from the
programs of all French political parties as utterly
unrealistic.
[10
]
To isolate France and avoid a war on two fronts,
Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors
between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany.
After
Russian victory in the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War
,
the League was dissolved due to Austrian concerns over
Russian influence in the Balkans, an area they
considered to be of vital strategic interest. Germany and
Austria-Hungary
then formed the 1879 Dual Alliance
,
which became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined in
1882.
[11] For Bismarck, the purpose of these agreements
was to isolate France by ensuring the three Empires
resolved any disputes between themselves; when this
was threatened in 1880 by British and French attempts
to negotiate directly with Russia, he reformed the
League in 1881, which was renewed in 1883 and 1885.
After the agreement lapsed in 1887, he replaced it with
the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between
Germany and Russia to remain neutral if either were
attacked by France or Austria-Hungary.
[12
]
Bismarck viewed peace with Russia as the foundation of
German foreign policy but after becoming Kaiser in
1890, Wilhelm II forced him to retire and was persuaded
not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty by his new
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 4/59
[show]
Date 28 July 1914 – 11 November
1918
(4 years, 3 months and
2 weeks)
Peace treaties
Treaty of Versailles
Signed 28 June 1919
[b]
Treaty of Saint-Germain-enLaye
Signed 10 September 1919
Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine
Signed 27 November 1919
[c]
Treaty of Trianon
Signed 4 June 1920
Treaty of Sèvres
Signed 10 August 1920
[d]
United States–Austria Peace
Treaty
Signed 24 August 1921
[e][f]
United States–Germany
Peace Treaty
Signed 25 August 1921
[g]
United States–Hungary
Peace Treaty
Signed 29 August 1921
[h]
Treaty of Lausanne
Signed 24 July 1923
[i]
Location Europe · Middle East · Africa ·
Pacific · Atlantic · Mediterranean
and Adriatic
Result Allied Powers victory
See Aftermath of World War I
Territorial
changes
Formation of new countries
in Europe and the Middle
East, such as Yugoslavia,
Weimar Germany, the Soviet
Union Lithuania Estonia
Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi.
[13] This provided France an
opportunity to counteract the Triple Alliance by signing
the Franco-Russian Alliance in 1894, followed by the
1904 Entente Cordiale with Britain. The Triple Entente
was completed by the 1907 Anglo-Russian Convention.
While these were not formal alliances, by settling longstanding colonial disputes in Asia and Africa, the notion
of British entry into any future conflict involving France
or Russia became a possibility.[14] British and Russian
support for France against Germany during the Agadir
Crisis in 1911 reinforced their relationship, increasing
Anglo-German estrangement.[15]
German industrial strength and production had
significantly increased after 1871, driven by the creation
of a unified Reich, French indemnity payments, and the
annexation of Alsace-Lorraine. Backed by Wilhelm II,
Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz sought to use this growth in
economic power to build a Kaiserliche Marine, or
Imperial German Navy, which could compete with the
British Royal Navy for naval supremacy.[16] His thinking
was influenced by US naval strategist Alfred Thayer
Mahan, who had argued that possession of a blue-water
navy was vital for global power projection; Tirpitz had
his books translated into German, while Wilhelm made
them required reading for his advisors and senior
military personnel.[17]
However, it was also an emotional decision, driven by
Wilhelm's simultaneous admiration for the Royal Navy
and desire to surpass it. Bismarck thought that the
British would not interfere in Europe, as long as its
maritime supremacy remained secure, but his dismissal
in 1890 led to a change in policy and an Anglo-German
naval arms race began.[18] Despite the vast sums spent
by Tirpitz, the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 gave
the British a technological advantage over their German
rivals.[16] Ultimately, the race diverted huge resources
into creating a German navy large enough to antagonise
Britain, but not defeat it; in 1911, Chancellor Theobald
von Bethmann Hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to
the Rüstungswende or 'armaments turning point', when
he switched expenditure from the navy to the army.[19]
This decision was not driven by a reduction in political
tensions, but German concern over Russia's quick
recovery from its defeat in the Russo-Japanese War and
subsequent 1905 Russian Revolution that same year.
Arms race
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 5/59
Union, Lithuania, Estonia,
Latvia, Austria, Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, Turkey,
Hejaz, and Yemen
Restoration of Polish
independence and
establishment of the Second
Polish Republic
Transfer of German colonies
and territories to other
countries, partition of the
Ottoman Empire, dissolution
of Austria-Hungary
[show]
Belligerents
Allied Powers:
France
United
Kingdom
and its
territories:
Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Egypt
Newfoundland
New
Zealand
India
Central Powers:
Germany
Austria-Hungary
Ottoman Empire
Bulgaria (from 1915)
and others ...
Economic reforms, backed by French funding, led to a significant post-1908 expansion of railways and
transportation infrastructure, particularly in its western border regions.[20] Since Germany and
Austria-Hungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for their numerical inferiority compared
to Russia, the threat posed by the closing of this gap was more important than competing with the
Royal Navy. After Germany expanded its standing army by 170,000 troops in 1913, France extended
compulsory military service from two to three years; similar measures were taken by the Balkan
powers and Italy, which led to increased expenditure by the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary. Absolute
figures are difficult to calculate due to differences in categorising expenditure, since they often omit
civilian infrastructure projects like railways which also had logistical importance and military use. It is
known, however, that from 1908 to 1913, military spending by the six major European powers
increased by over 50% in real terms.[21]
The years before 1914 were marked by a series of crises
in the Balkans, as other powers sought to benefit from
Ottoman decline. While Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russia
considered itself the protector of Serbia and other Slav
states, they preferred the strategically vital Bosporus
straits to be controlled by a weak Ottoman government,
rather than an ambitious Slav power like Bulgaria. Since
Russia had its own ambitions in northeastern Anatolia,
while their clients had overlapping claims in the
Balkans, balancing these divided Russian policy-makers
and added to regional instability.[22]
Austrian statesmen viewed the Balkans as essential for
the continued existence of their Empire, and saw
Serbian expansion as a direct threat. The 1908–1909
Bosnian Crisis began when Austria annexed the former
Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it
had occupied since 1878. Timed to coincide with the
Bulgarian Declaration of Independence from the
Ottoman Empire, this unilateral action was denounced
by the European powers, but accepted as there was no
consensus on how to resolve the situation. Some
historians see this as a significant escalation, ending any
chance of Austria co-operating with Russia in the
Balkans, while also damaging diplomatic relations
between Serbia and Italy, both of whom had their own
expansionist ambitions in the region.[23]
Tensions increased after the 1911–1912 Italo-Turkish
War demonstrated Ottoman weakness and led to the
formation of the Balkan League, an alliance of Serbia,
Bulgaria, Montenegro, and Greece.
[24] The League
quickly overran most of the Ottomans' territory in the
Balkans during the 1912–1913 First Balkan War, much to
the surprise of outside observers.[25] The Serbian
capture of ports on the Adriatic resulted in partial
Conflicts in the Balkans
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 6/59
South
Africa
Russia
[a]
Japan
Italy (from
1915)
United States
(from 1917)
and others ...
Commanders and leaders
Main Allied
leaders:
Raymond
Poincaré
H. H. Asquith
David Lloyd
George
Nicholas II
Vittorio
Emanuele Orlando
Woodrow
Wilson
Yoshihito
Main Central leaders:
Wilhelm II
Paul von Hindenburg
Franz Joseph I
Mehmed V
Ferdinand I
Casualties and losses
Military dead:
Over 5,525,000
Civilian dead:
Over 4,000,000
Total dead:
Over 9,000,000
...further details
Military dead:
Over 4,386,000
Civilian dead:
Over 3,700,000
Total dead:
Over 8,000,000
...further details
World empires and colonies around 1914
Austrian mobilisation, starting on 21 November 1912,
including units along the Russian border in Galicia. In a
meeting the next day, the Russian government decided
not to mobilise in response, unwilling to precipitate a
war for which they were not as of yet prepared to
handle.[26]
The Great Powers sought to re-assert control through
the 1913 Treaty of London, which had created an
independent Albania, while enlarging the territories of
Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro and Greece. However,
disputes between the victors sparked the 33-day Second
Balkan War, when Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece
on 16 June 1913; it was defeated, losing most of
Macedonia to Serbia and Greece, and Southern Dobruja
to Romania.[27] The result was that even countries which
benefited from the Balkan Wars, such as Serbia and
Greece, felt cheated of their "rightful gains", while for
Austria it demonstrated the apparent indifference with
which other powers viewed their concerns, including
Germany.[28] This complex mix of resentment,
nationalism and insecurity helps explain why the pre1914 Balkans became known as the "powder keg of
Europe".[29]
In the summer of 1914, the sovereigns of Europe were
woven together by treaties, alliances, as well as secret
agreements. The Triple Alliance (1882) encompassed the
German Empire, Austria, and Italy.[32]
On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria,
heir presumptive to Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria,
visited Sarajevo, capital of the recently annexed Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip,
Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, and Vaso
Čubrilović (Bosnian Serbs) and Muhamed
Mehmedbašić (from the Bosniaks community),[33]
from the movement known as Young Bosnia, took up
positions along the route taken by the Archduke's
motorcade, with the intention of assassinating him.
Supplied with arms by extremists within the Serbian
Black Hand intelligence organisation, they hoped his
death would free Bosnia from Austrian rule, although
there was little agreement on what would replace
it.[34]
Prelude
Sarajevo assassination
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 7/59
SMS Rheinland, a Nassau-class
battleship, Germany's first response
to the British Dreadnought
Sarajevo citizens reading a poster
with the proclamation of the Austrian
annexation in 1908
Traditionally thought to show the
arrest of Gavrilo Princip (right), this
photo is now believed by historians
to depict an innocent bystander,
Ferdinand Behr
[30][31]
Crowds on the streets in the
aftermath of the anti-Serb riots in
Sarajevo, 29 June 1914
Nedeljko Čabrinović threw a
grenade at the Archduke's car
and injured two of his aides,
who were taken to hospital
while the convoy carried on.
The other assassins were also
unsuccessful but, an hour
later, as Ferdinand was
returning from visiting the
injured officers, his car took a
wrong turn into a street where
Gavrilo Princip was standing.
He fired two pistol shots,
fatally wounding Ferdinand and his wife Sophie.
[35] Although
Emperor Franz Joseph was shocked by the incident, political and
personal differences meant the two men were not close; allegedly,
his first reported comment was "A higher power has re-established
the order which I, alas, could not preserve".[36]
According to historian Zbyněk Zeman, in Vienna "the event almost
failed to make any impression whatsoever. On 28 and 29 June, the
crowds listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had
happened."[37] Nevertheless, the impact of the murder of the heir
to the throne was significant, and has been described by historian
Christopher Clark as a "9/11 effect, a terrorist event charged with
historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in
Vienna".[38]
Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged subsequent anti-Serb
riots in Sarajevo, in which Bosnian Croats and Bosniaks killed two
Bosnian Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned
buildings.[39][40] Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were also
organised outside Sarajevo, in other cities in Austro-Hungariancontrolled Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia. AustroHungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and
extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of
whom died in prison. A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to
death. A predominantly Bosniak special militia known as the
Schutzkorps was established, and carried out the persecution of
Serbs.[41][42][43][44]
The assassination initiated the July Crisis, a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between AustriaHungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain. Believing that Serbian intelligence helped organise
Franz Ferdinand's murder, Austrian officials wanted to use the opportunity to end their interference
in Bosnia and saw war as the best way of achieving this.[45] However, the Foreign Ministry had no
Expansion of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
July Crisis
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 8/59
Cheering crowds in London and
Paris on the day war was declared.
Ethno-linguistic map of Austria-Hungary, 1910.
Bosnia-Herzegovina was annexed in 1908.
solid proof of Serbian involvement and a dossier used to make its
case contained multiple errors.[46] On 23 July, Austria delivered
an ultimatum to Serbia, listing ten demands made intentionally
unacceptable to provide an excuse for starting hostilities.[47]
Serbia ordered general mobilization on 25 July, but
accepted all the terms, except for those empowering Austrian representatives to suppress "subversive
elements" inside Serbia, and take part in the investigation and trial of Serbians linked to the
assassination.[48][49] Claiming this amounted to rejection, Austria broke off diplomatic relations and
ordered partial mobilisation the next day; on 28 July, they declared war on Serbia, and began shelling
Belgrade. Having initiated war preparations on 25 July, Russia now ordered general mobilization in
support of Serbia on 30th.[50]
Anxious to ensure backing from the SPD political opposition by presenting Russia as the aggressor,
German Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg delayed commencement of war preparations until 31 July.[51]
That afternoon, the Russian government were handed a note requiring them to "cease all war
measures against Germany and Austria-Hungary" within 12 hours.[52] A further German demand for
neutrality was refused by the French who ordered general mobilization but delayed declaring war.[53]
The German General Staff had long assumed they faced a war on two fronts; the Schlieffen Plan
envisaged using 80% of the army to defeat France, then switch to Russia. Since this required them to
move quickly, mobilization orders were issued that afternoon.[54]
At a meeting on 29 July, the British cabinet had narrowly decided its obligations to Belgium under the
1839 Treaty of London did not require it to oppose a German invasion with military force. However,
this was largely driven by Prime Minister Asquith's desire to maintain unity; he and his senior Cabinet
ministers were already committed to support France, the Royal Navy had been mobilised, and public
opinion was strongly in favour of intervention.[55] On 31 July, Britain sent notes to Germany and
France, asking them to respect Belgian neutrality; France pledged to do so, Germany did not reply.[56]
Once the German ultimatum to Russia expired on the morning of 1 August, the two countries were at
war. Later the same day, Wilhelm was informed by his ambassador in London, Prince Lichnowsky,
that Britain would remain neutral if France was not attacked, and might not intervene at all given the
ongoing Home Rule Crisis in Ireland.[57] Jubilant at this news, he ordered General Moltke, the
German chief of staff, to "march the whole of the ... army to the East". This allegedly brought Moltke
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 9/59
Serbian Army Blériot XI "Oluj", 1915
to the verge of a nervous breakdown, before Lichnowsky realized he was mistaken. Once Wilhelm
received a telegram from George V, it confirmed there had been a misunderstanding, and he told
Moltke, "Now do what you want."[58]
Aware of German plans to attack through Belgium, French Commander-in-Chief Joseph Joffre asked
his government for permission to cross the border and pre-empt such a move. To avoid violating
Belgian neutrality, he was told any advance could come only after a German invasion.[59]
Instead, the
French cabinet ordered its Army to withdraw 10 km behind the German frontier, in order to avoid any
incident which might provoke the war. On 2 August, Germany occupied Luxembourg and exchanged
fire with French units when German patrols entered French territory; on 3 August, they declared war
on France and demanded free passage across Belgium, which was refused. Early on the morning of
4 August, the Germans invaded, and Albert I of Belgium called for assistance under the Treaty of
London.
[60][61] Britain sent Germany an ultimatum demanding they withdraw from Belgium; when
this expired at midnight, without a response, the two empires were at war.[62]
The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication. Germany promised to support
Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed. Previously
tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but those had never been tested in exercises.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.[63]
Beginning on 12 August, the Austrians and Serbs clashed at the
battles of the Cer and Kolubara; over the next two weeks, Austrian
attacks were repulsed with heavy losses, dashing their hopes of a
swift victory and marking the first major Allied victories of the
war. As a result, Austria had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian
front, weakening their efforts against Russia.[64] Serbia's defeat of
the 1914 invasion has been called one of the major upset victories
of the twentieth century.[65]
In spring 1915, the campaign saw the
first use of anti-aircraft warfare after an Austrian plane was shot down with ground-to-air fire, as well
as the first medical evacuation by the Serbian army in autumn 1915.[66][67]
Upon mobilisation, 80% of the German Army was located on the Western Front, with the remainder
acting as a screening force in the East; officially titled Aufmarsch II West, it is better known as the
Schlieffen Plan after its creator, Alfred von Schlieffen, head of the German General Staff from 1891 to
1906. Rather than a direct attack across their shared frontier, the German right wing would sweep
Progress of the war
Opening hostilities
Confusion among the Central Powers
Serbian campaign
German offensive in Belgium and France
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 10/59
German soldiers on the way to the
front in 1914; at this stage, all sides
expected the conflict to be a short
one.
French bayonet charge during the
Battle of the Frontiers; by the end of
August, French casualties exceeded
260,000, including 75,000 dead.
through the Netherlands and Belgium, then swing south,
encircling Paris and trapping the French army against the Swiss
border. Schlieffen estimated that this would take six weeks, after
which the German army would transfer to the East and defeat the
Russians.[68]
The plan was substantially modified by his successor, Helmuth
von Moltke the Younger. Under Schlieffen, 85% of German forces
in the west were assigned to the right wing, with the remainder
holding along the frontier. By keeping his left wing deliberately
weak, he hoped to lure the French into an offensive into the "lost
provinces" of Alsace-Lorraine, which was the strategy envisaged by
their Plan XVII.
[68] However, Moltke grew concerned that the
French might push too hard on his left flank and as the German
Army increased in size from 1908 to 1914, he changed the
allocation of forces between the two wings from 85:15 to 70:30.[69] He also considered Dutch
neutrality essential for German trade and cancelled the incursion into the Netherlands, which meant
any delays in Belgium threatened the viability of the plan.[70] Historian Richard Holmes argues that
these changes meant the right wing was not strong enough to achieve decisive success and thus led to
unrealistic goals and timings.[71]
The initial German advance in the West was very successful and by
the end of August the Allied left, which included the British
Expeditionary Force (BEF), was in full retreat. At the same time,
the French offensive in Alsace-Lorraine was a disastrous failure,
with casualties exceeding 260,000, including 27,000 killed on 22
August during the Battle of the Frontiers.
[72] German planning
provided broad strategic instructions, while allowing army
commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the
front; this worked well in 1866 and 1870 but in 1914, von Kluck
used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the
German armies as they closed on Paris.[73] The French army,
reinforced by the British expeditionary corps, seized this
opportunity to counter-attack, and pushed the German army 40 to
80 km back. Both armies were then so exhausted that no decisive
move could be implemented, so they settled in trenches, with the vain hope to break through as soon
as they could build local superiority.
In 1911, the Russian Stavka agreed with the French to attack Germany within fifteen days of
mobilisation, ten days before the Germans had anticipated, although it meant the two Russian armies
that entered East Prussia on 17 August did so without many of their support elements.[74]
By the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the bulk
of France's domestic coalfields, and had inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itself. However,
communications problems, combined with questionable command decisions, cost Germany the
chance of a decisive outcome, while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long,
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 11/59
Japanese soldiers occupy an
abandoned German trench during
the Siege of Tsingtao, 1914
British Indian Army infantry divisions
in France; these troops were
withdrawn in December 1915, and
served in the Mesopotamian
campaign.
two-front war.[75] As was apparent to a number of German leaders, this amounted to a strategic
defeat; shortly after the Marne, Crown Prince Wilhelm told an American reporter "We have lost the
war. It will go on for a long time but lost it is already."[76]
On 30 August 1914, New Zealand occupied German Samoa, now
the independent state of Samoa. On 11 September, the Australian
Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of
New Britain, then part of German New Guinea. On 28 October, the
German cruiser SMS Emden sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug
in the Battle of Penang. Japan declared war on Germany prior to
seizing territories in the Pacific, which later became the South Seas
Mandate, as well as German Treaty ports on the Chinese
Shandong peninsula at Tsingtao. After Vienna refused to withdraw
its cruiser SMS Kaiserin Elisabeth from Tsingtao, Japan declared
war on Austria-Hungary as well, and the ship was sunk at Tsingtao
in November 1914.[77] Within a few months, Allied forces had
seized all German territories in the Pacific, leaving only isolated
commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea.[78][79]
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa. On
6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland and Kamerun.
On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting
continued for the rest of the war. The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel
Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I, and only
surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.[80]
Prior to the war, Germany had attempted to use Indian
nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage, a policy continued
post-1914 by instigating uprisings in India, while the
Niedermayer–Hentig Expedition urged Afghanistan to join the
war on the side of Central Powers. However, contrary to British
fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw a reduction
in nationalist activity.[81][82] This was largely because leaders from
the Indian National Congress and other groups believed support
for the British war effort would hasten Indian Home Rule, a
promise allegedly made explicit in 1917 by Edwin Montagu, the
Secretary of State for India.
[83]
In 1914, the British Indian Army was larger than the British Army
itself, and between 1914 and 1918 an estimated 1.3 million Indian
soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle
Asia and the Pacific
African campaigns
Indian support for the Allies
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 12/59
British Indian soldiers digging
trenches in Laventie, France, 1915
East, while the Government of India and their princely allies supplied large quantities of food, money,
and ammunition. In all, 140,000  soldiers served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the
Middle East, with 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded.[84]
The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant selfgovernment to India after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment, resulting in the campaign for
full independence led by Mahatma Gandhi.
[85]
Pre-war military tactics that had emphasised open warfare and the
individual rifleman proved obsolete when confronted with
conditions prevailing in 1914. Technological advances allowed the
creation of strong defensive systems largely impervious to massed
infantry advances, such as barbed wire, machine guns and above
all far more powerful artillery, which dominated the battlefield
and made crossing open ground extremely difficult.[86] Both sides
struggled to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions
without suffering heavy casualties. In time, however, technology
enabled the production of new offensive weapons, such as gas
warfare and the tank.
[87]
After the First Battle of the Marne in September 1914, Allied and
German forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series
of manoeuvres later known as the "Race to the Sea". By the end of
1914, the opposing forces confronted each other along an
uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from the Channel to
the Swiss border.[88] Since the Germans were normally able to
choose where to stand, they generally held the high ground, while
their trenches tended to be better built; those constructed by the French and English were initially
considered "temporary", only needed until an offensive would destroy the German defences.[89] Both
sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances. On 22 April 1915, at the
Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first
time on the Western Front. Several types of gas soon became widely used by both sides, and though it
never proved a decisive, battle-winning weapon, it became one of the most-feared and bestremembered horrors of the war.[90][91]
In February 1916, the Germans attacked French defensive positions at the Battle of Verdun, lasting
until December 1916. The Germans made initial gains, before French counter-attacks returned
matters to near their starting point. Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled
heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000[92]
to 975,000[93] casualties suffered between the two
combatants. Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.[94]
Western Front 1914 to 1916
Trench warfare begins
Continuation of trench warfare
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 13/59
German casualties at the Somme,
1916
Battleships of the Hochseeflotte,
1917
U-155 exhibited near Tower Bridge
in London, after the 1918 Armistice
The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive of July to
November 1916. The opening day on 1 July 1916 was the bloodiest
single day in the history of the British Army, which suffered
57,500 casualties, including 19,200 dead. As a whole, the Somme
offensive led to an estimated 420,000 British casualties, along
with 200,000 French and 500,000 German.[95] Gunfire was not
the only cause of death; the diseases that emerged in the trenches
were a major killer on both sides. The living conditions led to
disease and infection, such as trench foot, shell shock,
blindness/burns from mustard gas, lice, trench fever, "cooties"
(body lice) and the 'Spanish flu'.
At the start of the war, German cruisers were scattered across the
globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied
merchant shipping. These were systematically hunted down by the
Royal Navy, though not before causing considerable damage. One
of the most successful was the SMS Emden, part of the German
East Asia Squadron stationed at Qingdao, which seized or sank 15
merchantmen, as well as a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer.
Most of the squadron was returning to Germany when it sank two
British armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel in November
1914, before being virtually destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland
Islands in December. The SMS Dresden escaped with a few auxiliaries, but after the Battle of Más a
Tierra, these too were either destroyed or interned.[96]
Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany. This proved
effective in cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, though it violated accepted international
law.[97] Britain also mined international waters which closed off entire sections of ocean, even to
neutral ships.[98] Since there was limited response to this tactic of the British, Germany expected a
similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.[99]
The Battle of Jutland [l]
in May/June 1916 was the only full-scale clash of battleships during the war,
and one of the largest in history. The clash was indecisive, though the Germans inflicted more damage
than they received, since thereafter the bulk of the German High Seas Fleet was confined to port.[100]
German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North
America and Britain.[101] The nature of submarine warfare meant
that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the
merchant ships little hope of survival.[101][102] The United States
launched a protest, and Germany changed its rules of engagement.
After the sinking of the passenger ship RMS Lusitania in 1915,
Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain
armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of
the "cruiser rules", which demanded warning and movement of
crews to "a place of safety" (a standard that lifeboats did not
meet).[103] Finally, in early 1917, Germany adopted a policy of
unrestricted submarine warfare, realising the Americans would
Naval war
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 14/59
Refugee transport from Serbia in
Leibnitz, Styria, 1914
Bulgarian soldiers in a trench,
preparing to fire against an
incoming aeroplane
eventually enter the war.[101][104] Germany sought to strangle Allied sea lanes before the United States
could transport a large army overseas, but, after initial successes, eventually failed to do so.[101]
The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by
destroyers. This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses;
after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, destroyers could potentially successfully
attack a submerged submarine. Convoys slowed the flow of supplies since ships had to wait as convoys
were assembled; the solution was an extensive program of building new freighters. Troopships were
too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.[105] The U-boats sunk
more than 5,000 Allied ships, at a cost of 199 submarines.[106]
World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith
Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for
antisubmarine patrol.[107]
Faced with Russia in the east, Austria-Hungary could spare only onethird of its army to attack Serbia. After suffering heavy losses, the
Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade. A Serbian
counter-attack in the Battle of Kolubara succeeded in driving them
from the country by the end of 1914. For the first 10 months of 1915,
Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves to fight Italy.
German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by
persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia.[108] The AustroHungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops
for Austria-Hungary in the fight with Serbia, Russia and Italy.
Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.[109]
Bulgaria declared war on Serbia on 14 October 1915, and joined in the
attack by the Austro-Hungarian army under Mackensen's army of
250,000 that was already underway. Serbia was conquered in a little
more than a month, as the Central Powers, now including Bulgaria,
sent in 600,000 troops in total. The Serbian army, fighting on two
fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern Albania. The
Serbs suffered defeat in the Battle of Kosovo. Montenegro covered
the Serbian retreat toward the Adriatic coast in the Battle of
Mojkovac in 6–7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians also
conquered Montenegro. The surviving Serbian soldiers were then
evacuated to Greece.[110] After conquest, Serbia was divided between
Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.[111]
In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece to offer assistance and to pressure its
government to declare war against the Central Powers. However, the pro-German King Constantine I
dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos before the Allied expeditionary force
arrived.[112]
Southern theatres
War in the Balkans
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 15/59
Austro-Hungarian troops executing
captured Serbians, 1917. Serbia lost
about 850,000 people during the
war, a quarter of its pre-war
population.
[114]
Australian troops charging near a
Turkish trench during the Gallipoli
campaign
The Macedonian front was at first mostly static. French and Serbian forces retook limited areas of
Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916 following the costly Monastir offensive, which
brought stabilisation of the front.[113]
Serbian and French troops finally made a breakthrough in
September 1918 in the Vardar offensive, after most German and
Austro-Hungarian troops had been withdrawn. The Bulgarians
were defeated at the Battle of Dobro Pole, and by 25 September
British and French troops had crossed the border into Bulgaria
proper as the Bulgarian army collapsed. Bulgaria capitulated four
days later, on 29 September 1918.[115] The German high command
responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces
were too weak to re-establish a front.[116]
The disappearance of the Macedonian front meant that the road to
Budapest and Vienna was now opened to Allied forces.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and
operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central
Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an
immediate peace settlement.[117]
The Ottomans threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and
Britain's communications with India via the Suez Canal. As the
conflict progressed, the Ottoman Empire took advantage of the
European powers' preoccupation with the war and conducted
large-scale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Armenian, Greek,
and Assyrian Christian populations, known as the Armenian
genocide, Greek genocide, and Sayfo respectively.[118][119][120]
The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli
(1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns (1914). In Gallipoli, the
Ottoman Empire successfully repelled the British, French, and
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs). In
Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the defeat of the British defenders
in the siege of Kut by the Ottomans (1915–16), British Imperial forces reorganised and captured
Baghdad in March 1917. The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian fighters,
while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.[121]
Further to the west, the Suez Canal was defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 1916; in August, a
German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani by the ANZAC Mounted Division
and the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division. Following this victory, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force
advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in
December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in
January 1917.[122]
Russian armies generally had success in the Caucasus campaign. Enver Pasha, supreme commander
of the Ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of re-conquering central Asia and areas
that had been previously lost to Russia. He was, however, a poor commander.[123] He launched an
Ottoman Empire
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 16/59
Russian forest trench at the Battle of
Sarikamish, 1914–1915
Kaiser Wilhelm II and Prince
Leopold of Bavaria inspecting
Turkish troops of the 15th Corps in
East Galicia, Austria-Hungary (now
Poland).
offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914
with 100,000 troops, insisting on a frontal attack against
mountainous Russian positions in winter. He lost 86% of his force
at the Battle of Sarikamish.
[124]
The Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia
(modern Iran) in December 1914 in an effort to cut off British and
Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku near the
Caspian Sea.
[125] Persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under
the spheres of British and Russian influence. The Ottomans and
Germans were aided by Kurdish and Azeri forces, together with a
large number of major Iranian tribes, such as the Qashqai,
Tangistanis, Lurs, and Khamseh, while the Russians and British
had the support of Armenian and Assyrian forces. The Persian
campaign was to last until 1918 and end in failure for the
Ottomans and their allies. However, the Russian withdrawal from
the war in 1917 led Armenian and Assyrian forces, who had
hitherto inflicted a series of defeats upon the forces of the
Ottomans and their allies, to be cut off from supply lines,
outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and
flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.[126]
General Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916,
drove the Turks out of most of the southern Caucasus with a string
of victories.[124]
The Arab Revolt, instigated by the Arab bureau of the British
Foreign Office, started June 1916 with the Battle of Mecca, led by Sharif Hussein of Mecca. The Sharif
declared the independence of the Kingdom of Hejaz and, with British assistance, conquered much of
Ottoman held Arabia, resulting finally in the Ottoman surrender of Damascus. Fakhri Pasha, the
Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than 2
1
⁄2 years during the siege of Medina before
surrendering in January 1919.[127]
The Senussi tribe, along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, incited and armed by the Turks,
waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops. The British were forced to dispatch 12,000
troops to oppose them in the Senussi campaign. Their rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.[128]
Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men. Total Ottoman casualties were
725,000, with 325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded.[129]
Though Italy joined the Triple Alliance in 1882, a treaty with its traditional Austrian enemy was so
controversial that subsequent governments denied its existence and the terms were only made public
in 1915.[130] This arose from nationalist designs on Austro-Hungarian territory in Trentino, the
Austrian Littoral, Rijeka and Dalmatia, which were considered vital to secure the borders established
in 1866.
[131] In 1902, Rome secretly had agreed with France to remain neutral if the latter was
attacked by Germany, effectively nullifying its role in the Triple Alliance.[132]
Italian Front
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 17/59
Isonzo Offensives 1915–1917
Austro-Hungarian trench at 3,850
metres in the Ortler Alps, one of the
most challenging fronts of the war
When the war began in 1914, Italy argued the Triple Alliance was
defensive in nature and it was not obliged to support an Austrian
attack on Serbia. Opposition to joining the Central Powers
increased when Turkey became a member in September, since in
1911 Italy had occupied Ottoman possessions in Libya and the
Dodecanese islands.[133] To secure Italian neutrality, the Central
Powers offered them Tunisia, while in return for an immediate
entry into the war, the Allies agreed to their demands for Austrian
territory and sovereignty over the Dodecanese.[134] Although they
remained secret, these provisions were incorporated into the April
1915 Treaty of London; Italy joined the Triple Entente and, on 23
May, declared war on Austria-Hungary,[135]
followed by Germany
fifteen months later.
The pre-1914 Italian army was short of officers, trained men,
adequate transport and modern weapons; by April 1915, some of
these deficiencies had been remedied but it was still unprepared
for the major offensive required by the Treaty of London.[136] The
advantage of superior numbers was offset by the difficult terrain;
much of the fighting took place high in the Alps and Dolomites,
where trench lines had to be cut through rock and ice and keeping
troops supplied was a major challenge. These issues were
exacerbated by unimaginative strategies and tactics.[137] Between
1915 and 1917, the Italian commander, Luigi Cadorna, undertook a
series of frontal assaults along the Isonzo, which made little
progress and cost many lives; by the end of the war, Italian combat
deaths totaled around 548,000.[138]
In the spring of 1916, the Austro-Hungarians counterattacked in Asiago in the Strafexpedition, but
made little progress and were pushed by the Italians back to the Tyrol.[139] Although an Italian corps
occupied southern Albania in May 1916, their main focus was the Isonzo front which, after the capture
of Gorizia in August 1916, remained static until October 1917. After a combined Austro-German force
won a major victory at Caporetto, Cadorna was replaced by Armando Diaz who retreated more than
100 kilometres (62  mi) before holding positions along the Piave River.
[140] A second Austrian
offensive was repulsed in June 1918 and by October it was clear the Central Powers had lost the war.
On 24 October, Diaz launched the Battle of Vittorio Veneto and initially met stubborn resistance,[141]
but with Austria-Hungary collapsing, Hungarian divisions in Italy demanded they be sent home.[142]
When this was granted, many others followed and the Imperial army disintegrated, the Italians taking
over 300,000 prisoners.[143] On 3 November, the Armistice of Villa Giusti ended hostilities between
Austria-Hungary and Italy which occupied Trieste and areas along the Adriatic Sea awarded to it in
1915.[144]
As previously agreed with France, Russian plans at the start of the war were to simultaneously
advance into Austrian Galicia and East Prussia as soon as possible. Although their attack on Galicia
was largely successful, and the invasions achieved their aim of forcing Germany to divert troops from
Eastern Front
Initial actions
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 18/59
Emperor Nicholas II and Grand
Duke Nikolaevich following the
Russian capture of Przemyśl, the
longest siege of the war.
Romania key locations 1916–1918 (note;
using 2022 borders)
the Western Front, the speed of mobilisation meant they did so
without much of their heavy equipment and support functions.
These weaknesses contributed to Russian defeats at Tannenberg
and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914, forcing
them to withdraw from East Prussia with heavy losses.[145][146] By
spring 1915, they had also retreated from Galicia, and the May
1915 Gorlice–Tarnów offensive then allowed the Central Powers to
invade Russian-occupied Poland.
[147]
Despite the successful June 1916 Brusilov offensive against the
Austrians in eastern Galicia,[148] shortages of supplies, heavy
losses and command failures prevented the Russians from fully
exploiting their victory. However, it was one of the most
significant and impactful offensives of the war, diverting German
resources from Verdun, relieving Austro-Hungarian pressure on
the Italians, and convincing Romania to enter the war on the side of the Allies on 27 August. It also
fatally weakened both the Austrian and Russian armies, whose offensive capabilities were badly
affected by their losses and increased the disillusionment with the war that ultimately led to the
Russian revolutions.[149]
Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia as the Tsar remained at the front, with the home front controlled by
Empress Alexandra. Her increasingly incompetent rule and food shortages in urban areas led to
widespread protests and the murder of her favourite, Grigori Rasputin, at the end of 1916.[150]
Despite secretly agreeing to support the Triple Alliance in
1883, Romania increasingly found itself at odds with the
Central Powers over their support for Bulgaria in the Balkan
Wars and the status of ethnic Romanian communities in
Hungarian-controlled Transylvania,
[151] which comprised an
estimated 2.8 million of the 5.0 million population.[152] With
the ruling elite split into pro-German and pro-Entente
factions, Romania remained neutral in 1914, arguing like Italy
that because Austria-Hungary had declared war on Serbia, it
was under no obligation to join them.[153] They maintained
this position for the next two years, while allowing Germany
and Austria to transport military supplies and advisors across
Romanian territory.[154]
In September 1914, Russia had acknowledged Romanian rights to Austro-Hungarian territories
including Transylvania and Banat, whose acquisition had widespread popular support,[152] and
Russian success against Austria led Romania to join the Entente in the August 1916 Treaty of
Bucharest.[154] Under the strategic plan known as Hypothesis Z, the Romanian army planned an
offensive into Transylvania, while defending Southern Dobruja and Giurgiu against a possible
Bulgarian counterattack.[155] On 27 August 1916, they attacked Transylvania and occupied substantial
parts of the province before being driven back by the recently formed German 9th Army, led by former
Chief of Staff Falkenhayn.[156] A combined German-Bulgarian-Turkish offensive captured Dobruja
and Giurgiu, although the bulk of the Romanian army managed to escape encirclement and retreated
to Bucharest, which surrendered to the Central Powers on 6 December 1916.[157]
Romanian participation
Bucharest
Timișoara
(Banat)
Cluj
(Transylvania)
Chișinău
(Moldova)
Constanța
(Dobruja)
Bulgaria
Hungary
Mărășești
Oituz
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 19/59
"They shall not pass", a phrase
typically associated with the defence
of Verdun
On 7 May 1918 Romania signed the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers, which recognised
Romanian sovereignty over Bessarabia in return for ceding control of passes in the Carpathian
Mountains to Austria-Hungary and granting oil concessions to Germany.[158] Romania re-entered the
war on 10 November 1918 on the side of the Allies and the Treaty of Bucharest was formally annulled
by the Armistice of 11 November 1918.[159][m]
On 12 December 1916, after ten brutal months of the Battle of Verdun and a successful offensive
against Romania, Germany attempted to negotiate a peace with the Allies.[161] However, this attempt
was rejected out of hand as a "duplicitous war ruse".[161]
US president Woodrow Wilson attempted to intervene as a
peacemaker, asking for both sides to state their demands and start
negotiations. Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German
offer to be a ploy to create divisions among the Allies. After initial
outrage and much deliberation, they took Wilson's note as a
separate effort, signalling that the United States was on the verge
of entering the war against Germany following the "submarine
outrages". While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer,
the Germans chose to rebuff it in favour of "a direct exchange of
views". Learning of the German response, the Allied governments
were free to make clear demands in their response of 14 January.
They sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied
territories, reparations for France, Russia and Romania, and a
recognition of the principle of nationalities.[162] This included the
liberation of Italians, Slavs, Romanians, Czecho-Slovaks, and the creation of a "free and united
Poland".[162] The Allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars, complete with
sanctions, as a condition of any peace settlement.[163] The negotiations failed and the Entente powers
rejected the German offer on the grounds of honour, and noted Germany had not put forward any
specific proposals.[161]
By the end of 1916, Russian casualties totalled nearly five million killed, wounded or captured, with
major urban areas affected by food shortages and high prices. In March 1917, Tsar Nicholas ordered
the military to forcibly suppress a wave of strikes in Petrograd but the troops refused to fire on the
crowds.[164] Revolutionaries set up the Petrograd Soviet and fearing a left-wing takeover, the State
Duma forced Nicholas to abdicate and established the Russian Provisional Government, which
confirmed Russia's willingness to continue the war. However, the Petrograd Soviet refused to disband,
creating competing power centres and caused confusion and chaos, with frontline soldiers becoming
increasingly demoralised and unwilling to fight on.[165]
Following the Tsar's abdication, Vladimir Lenin—with the help of the German government—was
ushered from Switzerland into Russia on 16 April 1917. Discontent and the weaknesses of the
Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Lenin, which
Central Powers peace overtures
Final years of the war
Russian Revolution and withdrawal
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 20/59
President Wilson asking Congress
to declare war on Germany, 2 April
1917
demanded an immediate end to the war. The Revolution of November was followed in December by
an armistice and negotiations with Germany. At first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but
when German troops began marching across Ukraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918. The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, and parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.[166]
With the Russian Empire out of the war, Romania found itself alone on the Eastern Front and signed
the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers in May 1918, ending the state of war between
Romania and the Central Powers. Under the terms of the treaty, Romania had to give territory to
Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria, and lease its oil reserves to Germany. However, the terms also
included the Central Powers recognition of the union of Bessarabia with Romania.[167][168]
The United States was a major supplier of war material to the
Allies but remained neutral in 1914, in large part due to domestic
opposition.[169] The most significant factor in creating the support
Wilson needed was the German submarine offensive, which not
only cost American lives, but paralysed trade as ships were
reluctant to put to sea.[170]
On 6 April 1917, Congress declared war on Germany as an
"Associated Power" of the Allies.[171] The United States Navy sent a
battleship group to Scapa Flow to join the Grand Fleet, and
provided convoy escorts. In April 1917, the United States Army
had fewer than 300,000 men, including National Guard units,
compared to British and French armies of 4.1 and 8.3  million
respectively. The Selective Service Act of 1917 drafted 2.8 million
men, though training and equipping such numbers was a huge logistical challenge. By June 1918, over
667,000 members of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) were transported to France, a figure
which reached 2 million by the end of November.[172]
Despite his conviction that Germany must be defeated, Wilson went to war to ensure the US played a
leading role in shaping the peace, which meant preserving the AEF as a separate military force, rather
than being absorbed into British or French units as his Allies wanted.[173] He was strongly supported
by AEF commander General John J. Pershing, a proponent of pre-1914 "open warfare" who
considered the French and British emphasis on artillery as misguided and incompatible with
American "offensive spirit".[174] Much to the frustration of his Allies, who had suffered heavy losses in
1917, he insisted on retaining control of American troops, and refused to commit them to the front line
until able to operate as independent units. As a result, the first significant US involvement was the
Meuse–Argonne offensive in late September 1918.[175]
In December 1916, Robert Nivelle replaced Pétain as commander of French armies on the Western
Front and began planning a spring attack in Champagne, part of a joint Franco-British operation.
Nivelle claimed the capture of his main objective, the Chemin des Dames, would achieve a massive
breakthrough and cost no more than 15,000 casualties.[176] Poor security meant German intelligence
was well informed on tactics and timetables, but despite this, when the attack began on 16 April the
United States enters the war
Nivelle Offensive (April–May 1917)
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 21/59
Canadian Corps troops at the Battle
of Vimy Ridge, 1917
British artillery battery on Mount
Scopus in the Battle of Jerusalem,
1917.
French made substantial gains, before being brought to a halt by
the newly built and extremely strong defences of the Hindenburg
Line. Nivelle persisted with frontal assaults and, by 25 April, the
French had suffered nearly 135,000 casualties, including 30,000
dead, most incurred in the first two days.[177]
Concurrent British attacks at Arras were more successful, though
ultimately of little strategic value.[178] Operating as a separate unit
for the first time, the Canadian Corps capture of Vimy Ridge is
viewed by many Canadians as a defining moment in creating a
sense of national identity.[179][180] Though Nivelle continued the
offensive, on 3 May the 21st Division, which had been involved in
some of the heaviest fighting at Verdun, refused orders to go into
battle, initiating the French Army mutinies; within days,
"collective indiscipline" had spread to 54 divisions, while over 20,000 deserted.[181] Unrest was
almost entirely confined to the infantry, whose demands were largely non-political, including better
economic support for families at home, and regular periods of leave, which Nivelle had ended.[182]
In March and April 1917, at the First and Second Battles of Gaza,
German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian
Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at the Battle
of Romani.[183][184] At the end of October, the Sinai and Palestine
campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps,
XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of
Beersheba.
[185] Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks
later at the Battle of Mughar Ridge and, early in December,
Jerusalem had been captured following another Ottoman defeat at
the Battle of Jerusalem.
[186][187][188] About this time, Friedrich
Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the
Eighth Army's commander, replaced by Djevad Pasha, and a few months later the commander of the
Ottoman Army in Palestine, Erich von Falkenhayn, was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders.
[189][190]
In early 1918, the front line was extended and the Jordan Valley was occupied, following the First
Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks by British Empire forces in March and April
1918.[191]
In December 1917, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia, thus freeing large numbers of
German troops for use in the west. With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring
in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front. The Central Powers knew that they could not
win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success in a final quick offensive.[193] Ludendorff
drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael) for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front. The
operation commenced on 21 March 1918, with an attack on British forces near Saint-Quentin. German
forces achieved an unprecedented advance of 60 kilometres (37  mi).[194] The initial offensive a
success; after heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted. Lacking tanks or motorised artillery,
Sinai and Palestine campaign (1917–1918)
German offensive and Allied counter-offensive (March–November 1918)
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 22/59
Between April and November 1918,
the Allies increased their front-line
rifle strength while German strength
fell by half.
[192]
American soldiers firing on German
entrenched positions during the
Meuse-Argonne offensive, 1918
Bulgarian major Ivanov with white
flag surrendering to Serbian 7th
Danube regiment near Kumanovo
the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains. The problems
of re-supply were also exacerbated by increasing distances that
now stretched over terrain that was shell-torn and often
impassable to traffic.[195]
Following this, Germany launched Operation Georgette against
the northern English Channel ports. The Allies halted the drive
after limited territorial gains by Germany. The German Army to
the south then conducted Operations Blücher and Yorck, pushing
broadly towards Paris. Germany launched Operation Marne
(Second Battle of the Marne) on 15 July, in an attempt to encircle
Reims. The resulting counter-attack, which started the Hundred
Days Offensive on 8 August,[196]
led to a marked collapse in
German morale.[197][198][199]
By September, the Germans had fallen back to the Hindenburg
Line. The Allies had advanced to the Hindenburg Line in the north
and centre. German forces launch numerous counterattacks, but
positions and outposts of the Line continued falling, with the BEF
alone taking 30,441 prisoners in the last week of September. On 24
September, Supreme Army Command informed the leaders in
Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.[200]
The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the MeuseArgonne offensive, launched by American and French troops on 26
September. Two days later the Allied armies (Belgian, French and
British) attacked around Ypres, and the day after the British
Fourth and French First Army at St Quentin in the centre of the
line. The following week, co-operating American and French units
broke through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge (3–27 October), forcing the Germans
off the commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.[201] On 8 October, the
Hindenburg Line was pierced by British and Dominion troops of the First and Third British Armies at
the Second Battle of Cambrai.
[202]
Allied forces started the Vardar offensive on 15 September at two
key points: Dobro Pole and near Dojran Lake. In the Battle of
Dobro Pole, the Serbian and French armies had success after a
three-day long battle with relatively small casualties, and
subsequently made a breakthrough in the front, something which
was rarely seen in World War I. After the front was broken, Allied
Allied advance to the Hindenburg Line
Breakthrough of Macedonian Front (September 1918)
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 23/59
Italian troops reach Trento during
the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, 1918
Ferdinand Foch (second from
right) pictured outside the
carriage in Compiègne after
agreeing to the armistice that
ended the war there.
[210]
forces started to liberate Serbia and reached Skopje at 29 September, after which Bulgaria signed an
armistice with the Allies on 30 September.[203][204]
The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly. Bulgaria was the
first to sign an armistice, the Armistice of Salonica on 29
September 1918.[205] German Emperor Wilhelm II in a telegram
to Bulgarian Tsar Ferdinand I described the situation thus:
"Disgraceful! 62,000 Serbs decided the war!".[206][207] On the
same day, the German Supreme Army Command informed Kaiser
Wilhelm II and the Imperial Chancellor Count Georg von Hertling,
that the military situation facing Germany was hopeless.[208]
On 24 October, the Italians began a push that rapidly recovered
territory lost after the Battle of Caporetto. This culminated in the
Battle of Vittorio Veneto, marking the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting
force. The offensive also triggered the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During the last
week of October, declarations of independence were made in Budapest, Prague, and Zagreb. On 29
October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice, but the Italians continued advancing,
reaching Trento, Udine, and Trieste. On 3 November, Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for
an armistice (Armistice of Villa Giusti). The terms, arranged with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were
communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria was signed in
the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November. Austria and Hungary signed separate armistices
following the overthrow of the Habsburg monarchy. In the following days, the Italian Army occupied
Innsbruck and all Tyrol, with over 20,000 soldiers.[209]
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, and signed the Armistice of Mudros.[205]
With the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the
Kaiser leading to his abdication and fleeing of the country, Germany
moved towards surrender. Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge of a
new government on October 3rd as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate
with the Allies. Negotiations with President Wilson began immediately,
in the hope that he would offer better terms than the British and French.
Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control
over the German military.[211]
In northern Germany, the German Revolution of 1918–1919 began at
the end of October 1918. Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for
a last, large-scale operation in a war they believed to be as good as lost,
initiating the uprising. The sailors' revolt, which then ensued in the
naval ports of Wilhelmshaven and Kiel, spread across the whole country
Armistices and capitulations
German government surrenders
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 24/59
The signing of the Treaty of
Versailles in the Hall of
Mirrors, Versailles, 28 June
1919, by Sir William Orpen
Greek prime minister Eleftherios
Venizelos signing the Treaty of
Sèvres
within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on 9 November 1918, shortly thereafter to the
abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II, and to German surrender.[212][213][214][215][216]
In the aftermath of the war, four empires disappeared: the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and
Russian.[n] Numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones were created. Four
dynasties fell as a result of the war: the Romanovs, the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburgs, and the
Ottomans. Belgium and Serbia were badly damaged, as was France, with 1.4 million soldiers dead,[217]
not counting other casualties. Germany and Russia were similarly affected.[218]
A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven
months, until the signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28
June 1919. The United States Senate did not ratify the treaty despite
public support for it,[219][220] and did not formally end its involvement
in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921
by President Warren G. Harding.
[221] For the British Empire, the state
of war ceased under the provisions of the Termination of the Present
War (Definition) Act 1918 with respect to:
Germany on 10 January 1920.[222]
Austria on 16 July 1920.[223]
Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.[224]
Hungary on 26 July 1921.[225]
Turkey on 6 August 1924.[226]
Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the
Versailles Treaty was signed in 1919, which was when many of the
troops serving abroad finally returned home; by contrast, most
commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of
11 November 1918.[227]
After the war, there grew a certain amount of academic focus on
the causes of war and on the elements that could make peace
flourish. In part, these led to the institutionalization of peace and
conflict studies, security studies and International Relations (IR)
in general.[228] The Paris Peace Conference imposed a series of
peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war. The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with
Germany and, building on Wilson's 14th point, established the League of Nations on 28 June
1919.[229][230]
Aftermath
Formal end of the war
Peace treaties and national boundaries
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 25/59
Map of territorial changes in Europe after
World War I (as of 1923)
Dissolution of Austria-Hungary after war
The Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for
"all the loss and damage to which the Allied and
Associated Governments and their nationals have been
subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them
by" their aggression. In the Treaty of Versailles, this
statement was Article 231. This article became known as
the "War Guilt Clause", as the majority of Germans felt
humiliated and resentful.[231] Overall, the Germans felt
they had been unjustly dealt with by what they called the
"diktat of Versailles". German historian Hagen Schulze
said the Treaty placed Germany "under legal sanctions,
deprived of military power, economically ruined, and
politically humiliated."[232] Belgian historian Laurence
Van Ypersele emphasises the central role played by
memory of the war and the Versailles Treaty in German politics in the 1920s and 1930s:
Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and
continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning
and memory of the war problematic. The legend of the "stab in the back" and the wish to
revise the "Versailles diktat", and the belief in an international threat aimed at the
elimination of the German nation persisted at the heart of German politics. Even a man of
peace such as [Gustav] Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt. As for the Nazis, they
waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to
galvanise the German nation into a spirit of revenge. Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany
sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.[233]
Meanwhile, new nations liberated from German rule viewed the treaty as a recognition of wrongs
committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbours.[234]
Austria-Hungary was partitioned into several successor
states, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines. Apart
from Austria and Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Italy, Poland,
Romania and Yugoslavia received territories from the
Dual Monarchy (the formerly separate and autonomous
Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia was incorporated into
Yugoslavia). The details were contained in the SaintGermain-en-Laye and the Treaty of Trianon. As a result,
Hungary lost 64% of its total population, decreasing from
20.9  million to 7.6  million, and losing 31% (3.3 out of
10.7  million) of its ethnic Hungarians.
[235] According to
the 1910 census, speakers of the Hungarian language
included approximately 54% of the entire population of the Kingdom of Hungary. Within the country,
numerous ethnic minorities were present: 16.1% Romanians, 10.5% Slovaks, 10.4% Germans, 2.5%
Ruthenians, 2.5% Serbs and 8% others.[236] Between 1920 and 1924, 354,000 Hungarians fled former
Hungarian territories attached to Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.[237]
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 26/59
Transporting Ottoman wounded at
Sirkeci
The Russian Empire, which withdrew from the war in 1917 after the October Revolution, lost much of
its western frontier as the newly independent nations of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and
Poland were carved from it. Romania took control of Bessarabia in April 1918.[238]
After 123 years, Poland re-emerged as an independent country. The Kingdom of Serbia and its
dynasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per capita,[239][240][241]
became the backbone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later
renamed Yugoslavia. Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom
of Hungary, became a new nation. Romania would unite all Romanian-speaking people under a single
state, leading to Greater Romania.
[242]
In Australia and New Zealand, the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those nations' "Baptism of
Fire". It was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the
first times that Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown, and
independent national identities for these nations took hold. Anzac Day, commemorating the
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), celebrates this defining moment.[243][244]
In the aftermath of World War I, Greece fought against Turkish nationalists led by Mustafa Kemal, a
war that eventually resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the
Treaty of Lausanne.[245] According to various sources,[246] several hundred thousand Greeks died
during this period, which was tied in with the Greek genocide.[247]
Of the 60  million European military personnel who were
mobilised from 1914 to 1918, 8 million were killed, 7 million were
permanently disabled, and 15  million were seriously injured.
Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population, Austria-Hungary
lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.[248] France mobilised
7.8  million men, of which 1.4  million died and 3.2  million were
injured.[249] Approximately 15,000 sustained horrific facial
injuries, causing social stigma and marginalisation; they were
called the gueules cassées. In Germany, civilian deaths were
474,000 higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food
shortages and malnutrition that had weakened resistance to
disease. These excess deaths are estimated as 271,000 in 1918,
plus another 71,000 in the first half of 1919 when the blockade was still in effect.[250] Starvation
caused by famine killed approximately 100,000  people in Lebanon.[251] Between 5 and 10  million
people died in the Russian famine of 1921.
[252] By 1922, there were between 4.5 million and 7 million
homeless children in Russia as a result of devastation from World War I, the Russian Civil War, and
the subsequent famine of 1920–1922.[253] Numerous anti-Soviet Russians fled the country after the
Revolution; by the 1930s, the northern Chinese city of Harbin had 100,000 Russians.[254]
Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions. In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus
killed 200,000 in Serbia.[255] From 1918 to 1922, Russia had about 25 million infections and 3 million
deaths from epidemic typhus.[256]
In 1923, 13 million Russians contracted malaria, a sharp increase
from the pre-war years.[257] Starting in early 1918, a major influenza epidemic known as Spanish flu
National identities
Casualties
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 27/59
Emergency military hospital during
the Spanish flu pandemic in Camp
Funston, Kansas, 1918
French soldiers making a gas and
flame attack on German trenches in
Flanders
spread around the world, accelerated by the movement of large
number of soldiers, often crammed together in camps and
transport ships with poor sanitation. The Spanish flu killed at least
17  million to 25  million people,[258][259]
including an estimated
2.64 million Europeans and as many as 675,000 Americans.[260]
Between 1915 and 1926, an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica
spread around the world affecting nearly five million
people.[261][262]
8 million equines including horses, donkeys and mules died,
three-quarters of them from the extreme conditions they worked
in.[263]
The German army was the first to successfully deploy chemical
weapons during the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April – 25 May
1915), after German scientists working under the direction of Fritz
Haber at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute developed a method to
weaponize chlorine.
[o][264] The use of chemical weapons had been
sanctioned by the German High Command in an effort to force
Allied soldiers out of their entrenched positions, complementing
rather than supplanting more lethal conventional weapons.[264]
In
time, chemical weapons were deployed by all major belligerents
throughout the war, inflicting approximately 1.3 million casualties,
but relatively few fatalities: About 90,000 in total.[264] For
example, there were an estimated 186,000 British chemical
weapons casualties during the war (80% of which were the result
of exposure to the vesicant 'mustard gas', introduced to the
battlefield by the Germans in July 1917),[264] and up to one-third of American casualties were caused
by them. The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in
World War I.[265] The use of chemical weapons in warfare was a direct violation of the 1899 Hague
Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which
prohibited their use.[266][267]
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and
executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.
[269] The Ottomans
carried out organised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the
war and manipulated acts of Armenian resistance by portraying them as rebellions to justify further
extermination.[270]
In early 1915, a number of Armenians volunteered to join the Russian forces and
the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation), which
authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915
and 1918. The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by
Ottoman brigands.[271] While an exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of
War crimes
Chemical weapons in warfare
Genocides by the Ottoman Empire
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 28/59
Armenians killed during the
Armenian genocide. Image taken
from Ambassador Morgenthau's
Story, written by Henry Morgenthau
Sr. and published in 1918.
[268]
British prisoners guarded by
Ottoman forces after the First Battle
of Gaza in 1917
Genocide Scholars estimates 1.5 million.[269][272] The government
of Turkey continues to deny the genocide to the present day,
arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting,
famine, or disease during World War I; these claims are rejected
by most historians.[273]
Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman
Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and
some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy
of extermination.[274][275][276] At least 250,000 Assyrian
Christians, about half of the population, and 350,000–750,000
Anatolian and Pontic Greeks were killed between 1915 and
1922.[277]
About eight million soldiers surrendered and were held in POW
camps during the war. All nations pledged to follow the Hague
Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival
rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of combatants
at the front.[278]
25–31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured,
wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status, for Austria-Hungary
32%, for Italy 26%, for France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain
7%. Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.4  million
(not including Russia, which lost 2.5–3.5  million soldiers as
prisoners). From the Central Powers, about 3.3  million soldiers
became prisoners; most of them surrendered to Russians.[279]
Allied personnel was around 42,928,000, while Central personnel was near 25,248,000.[218][280] The
British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted. Surviving
veterans, returning home, often found they could discuss their experiences only among themselves.
Grouping together, they formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions". A small number of personal
accounts of American veterans have been collected by the Library of Congress Veterans History
Project.
[281]
Conscription was common in most European countries. However, it was controversial in Englishspeaking countries.[282]
It was especially unpopular among minority ethnicities—especially the Irish
Catholics in Ireland[283] and Australia,[284][285]
 and the French Catholics in Canada.[286][287]
In the United States, conscription began in 1917 and was generally well received, with a few pockets of
opposition in isolated rural areas.[288] The administration decided to rely primarily on conscription,
rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower after only 73,000 volunteers enlisted out
Prisoners of war
Soldiers' experiences
Conscription
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 29/59
U.S. Army recruiting poster with
Uncle Sam
Poster showing women workers,
1915
of the initial 1 million target in the first six weeks of the war.[289]
Military and civilian observers from every major power closely
followed the course of the war. Many were able to report on events
from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded"
positions within the opposing land and naval forces.
Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war.
Families were altered by the departure of many men. With the
death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced
into the workforce in unprecedented numbers. At the same time,
industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war. This
aided the struggle for voting rights for women.
[290]
In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased,
surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching
that level in Britain. To pay for purchases in the United States,
Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads
and then began borrowing heavily from Wall Street. President
Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916 but
allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies.
After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans. The
repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in
turn, were supported by American loans to Germany. This circular
system collapsed in 1931 and some loans were never repaid.
Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion[p] of World War I
debt in 1934; the last installment was finally paid in 2015.[291]
Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war
materials whose supply from traditional sources had become
difficult. Geologists such as Albert Kitson were called on to find
new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies. Kitson
discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in
munitions production, in the Gold Coast.
[292]
Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt"
clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and
Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed
upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies."[293] It was worded as such to lay a legal basis
for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with Austria and Hungary. However,
neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt."[294]
In 1921, the total reparation sum was
placed at 132  billion gold marks. However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this
sum. The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be
chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the "total sum
Military attachés and war correspondents
Economic effects
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 30/59
was being maintained."[295] Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual
Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore  … represented the total German
reparations" figure that had to be paid.[295]
This figure could be paid in cash or in-kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.). In addition, some of the
territory lost—via the treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation figure as were other
acts such as helping to restore the Library of Louvain.[296] By 1929, the Great Depression arrived,
causing political chaos throughout the world.[297]
In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended
by the international community, by which point Germany had paid only the equivalent of
20.598 billion gold marks in reparations.[298] With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that
had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled. David Andelman
notes "refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void. The bonds, the agreement, still exist."
Thus, following the Second World War, at the London Conference in 1953, Germany agreed to resume
payment on the money borrowed. On 3 October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these
bonds.[q]
The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, David Lloyd George,
"You have assured us that you cannot get better terms. I much regret it, and hope even now that some
way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the
tremendous sacrifices made by the British Empire and her Allies." Australia received £5,571,720 war
reparations, but the direct cost of the war to Australia had been £376,993,052, and, by the mid-1930s,
repatriation pensions, war gratuities, interest and sinking fund charges were £831,280,947.[303] Of
about 416,000 Australians who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were
wounded.[218]
The war contributed to the evolution of the wristwatch from women's jewellery to a practical everyday
item, replacing the pocketwatch, which requires a free hand to operate.[304] Trench watches were
designed for use by the military as pocket watches were not as effective for combat. Military funding of
advancements in radio contributed to the post-war popularity of the medium.[304]
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war,
desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of
an independent Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav Committee, led by Trumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April
1915 but shortly moved its office to London.[305]
In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed
Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav
representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing
within Austria-Hungary.[306]
In the Middle East, Arab nationalism soared in Ottoman territories in response to the rise of Turkish
nationalism during the war, with Arab nationalist leaders advocating the creation of a pan-Arab state.
In 1916, the Arab Revolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East in an effort to
achieve independence.[307]
Support and opposition for the war
Support
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 31/59
Poster urging women to join
the British war effort,
published by the Young
Women's Christian
Association
Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps First
Contingent in Bermuda, winter
1914–1915, before joining 1
Lincolnshire Regiment in France in
June 1915. The dozen remaining
after Guedecourt on 25 September
1916, merged with a Second
Contingent. The two contingents
suffered 75% casualties.
In East Africa, Iyasu V of Ethiopia was supporting the Dervish state who
were at war with the British in the Somaliland campaign.
[308] Von
Syburg, the German envoy in Addis Ababa, said, "now the time has
come for Ethiopia to regain the coast of the Red Sea driving the Italians
home, to restore the Empire to its ancient size." The Ethiopian Empire
was on the verge of entering World War I on the side of the Central
Powers before Iyasu's overthrow at the Battle of Segale due to Allied
pressure on the Ethiopian aristocracy.[309]
Iyasu was accused of
converting to Islam.
[310] According to Ethiopian historian Bahru Zewde,
the evidence used to prove Iyasu's conversion was a doctored photo of
Iyasu wearing a turban provided by the Allies.[311] Some historians
claim the British spy T. E. Lawrence forged the photo.[312]
A number of socialist parties initially
supported the war when it began in
August 1914.[306] But European
socialists split on national lines, with
the concept of class conflict held by
radical socialists such as Marxists
and syndicalists being overborne by
their patriotic support for the
war.[313] Once the war began,
Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed
the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries'
intervention in the war.[314]
Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was
initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions. One of
the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of
the war was Gabriele D'Annunzio, who promoted Italian
irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support
intervention in the war.[315] The Italian Liberal Party, under the
leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and used the
Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.[316]
Italian socialists were divided on whether
to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini
and Leonida Bissolati.
[317] However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after antimilitarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.
[318] The Italian
Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.[318] Mussolini, a
syndicalist who supported the war on grounds of irredentist claims on Italian-populated regions of
Austria-Hungary, formed the pro-interventionist Il Popolo d'Italia and the Fasci Rivoluzionario
d'Azione Internazionalista ("Revolutionary Fasci for International Action") in October 1914 that later
developed into the Fasci Italiani di Combattimento in 1919, the origin of fascism.[319] Mussolini's
nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to
create Il Popolo d'Italia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.[320]
Patriotic funds
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 32/59
Sackville Street (now O'Connell
Street) after the 1916 Easter Rising
in Dublin
On both sides there was large scale fundraising for soldiers' welfare, their dependents and for those
injured. The Nail Men were a German example. Around the British Empire there were many patriotic
funds, including the Royal Patriotic Fund Corporation, Canadian Patriotic Fund, Queensland Patriotic
Fund and, by 1919, there were 983 funds in New Zealand.[321] At the start of the next world war the
New Zealand funds were reformed, having been criticised as overlapping, wasteful and abused,[322]
but 11 were still functioning in 2002.[323]
Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict. These included Eugene Debs in the
United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain. In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of
1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed
"disloyal". Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal
censors,[324]
 and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.
A number of nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within
states that the nationalists were hostile to. Although the vast
majority of Irish people consented to participate in the war in 1914
and 1915, a minority of advanced Irish nationalists had staunchly
opposed taking part.[325] The war began amid the Home Rule
crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912, and by July 1914 there
was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland.
Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish
independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with
Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in
Britain.[326] The UK government placed Ireland under martial law
in response to the Easter Rising, though once the immediate threat
of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make
concessions to nationalist feeling.[327] However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in
Ireland, resulting in the Conscription Crisis of 1918.
Other opposition came from conscientious objectors—some socialist, some religious—who had refused
to fight. In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.[328] Some of them, most
notably prominent peace activist Stephen Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative
service.
[329] Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets.
Even after the war, in Britain many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need
apply".[330]
On 1–4 May 1917, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and after them, the workers and
soldiers of other Russian cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down
with the war!" and "all power to the soviets!" The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the
Russian Provisional Government.
[331] In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and
engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public
transportation.[332] The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face
Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until May 23rd when the army gained control of the
city. Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people arrested.[332]
Opposition
Technology
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 33/59
Royal Air Force Sopwith Camel. In
April 1917, the average life
expectancy of a British pilot on the
Western Front was 93 flying
hours.
[333]
1917 political cartoon about the
Zimmermann Telegram
World War I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and
19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties.
By the end of 1917, however, the major armies, now numbering
millions of men, had modernised and were making use of
telephone, wireless communication,
[334] armoured cars, tanks
(especially with the advent of the first prototype tank, Little
Willie), and aircraft.[335]
Artillery also underwent a revolution. In 1914, cannons were
positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets. By
1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine
guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and
ranging, notably, aircraft and the often overlooked field
telephone.
[336]
Fixed-wing aircraft were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack. To shoot down enemy
planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed. Strategic bombers were created,
principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.[337] Towards the
end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith
Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tønder in 1918.[338]
The non-military diplomatic and propaganda interactions among
the nations were designed to build support for the cause or to
undermine support for the enemy. For the most part, wartime
diplomacy focused on five issues: propaganda campaigns; defining
and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war
went on; luring neutral nations (Italy, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria,
Romania) into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory;
and encouragement by the Allies of nationalistic minority
movements inside the Central Powers, especially among Czechs,
Poles, and Arabs. In addition, there were multiple peace proposals
coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them
progressed very far.[339][340][341]
Memorials were built in thousands of villages and towns. Close to battlefields, those buried in
improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations
such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission,
the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français. Many of these graveyards also have
central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate Memorial to the
Missing and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.
Diplomacy
Legacy and memory
Memorials
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 34/59
The Italian Redipuglia War
Memorial, which contains the
remains of 100,187 soldiers
A typical village war memorial to
soldiers killed in World War I
In 1915, John McCrae, a Canadian army doctor, wrote the poem In
Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the war.
Published in Punch on 8 December 1915, it is still recited today,
especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.
[342][343]
National World War I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City,
Missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in
World War I. The Liberty Memorial was dedicated on 1 November
1921, when the supreme Allied commanders spoke to a crowd of
more than 100,000 people.[344]
The UK Government has budgeted substantial resources to the
commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018. The
lead body is the Imperial War Museum.
[345] On 3 August 2014,
French President François Hollande and German President
Joachim Gauck together marked the centenary of Germany's
declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a
memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as
Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in
the war.[346] During the Armistice centenary commemorations,
French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor
Angela Merkel visited the site of the signing of the Armistice of
Compiègne and unveiled a plaque to reconciliation.[347]
... "Strange, friend," I said, "Here is no cause to mourn."
"None," said the other, "Save the undone years"... 
—Wilfred Owen, Strange Meeting, 1918[348]
The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began
during the initial phases of the war; this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities,
and is still underway more than a century later. Teaching World War I has presented special
challenges. When compared with World War II, the First World War is often thought to be "a wrong
war fought for the wrong reasons"; it lacks the metanarrative of good versus evil that characterizes
retellings of the Second World War. Lacking recognizable heroes and villains, it is often taught
thematically, invoking tropes like the wastefulness of war, the folly of generals and the innocence of
soldiers. The complexity of the conflict is mostly obscured by these oversimplifications.[349] George
Kennan referred to the war as the "seminal catastrophe of the 20th century".[350]
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by a cultural turn in
the 21st century. Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation,
radicalisation of politics, race, medical science, gender and mental health. Among the major subjects
that historians have long debated regarding the war include: Why the war began; why the Allies won;
Historiography
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 35/59
whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates; how soldiers endured the poor conditions
of trench warfare; and to what extent the civilian home front accepted and endorsed the war
effort.[351][352]
As late as 2007, signs warning visitors to keep off certain paths at battlefield sites like Verdun and
Somme remained in place as unexploded ordnance continued to pose a danger. In France and
Belgium locals who discover caches of unexploded munitions are assisted by weapons disposal units.
In some places, plant life has still not returned to normal.[349]
Lists of World War I topics
List of military engagements of World War I
Outline of World War I
World war
a. Russian Empire during 1914–1917, Russian Republic during 1917. The Bolshevik government
signed a separate peace with the Central Powers shortly after their armed seizure of power,
resulting in a Central Powers victory on the Eastern Front of the war, and Russian defeat.
However, this peace treaty was nullified by an Allied Powers victory on the Western Front, and the
end of the war.
b. The United States did not ratify any of the treaties agreed to at the Paris Peace Conference.
c. Bulgaria joined the Central Powers on 14 October 1915.
d. The Ottoman Empire agreed to a secret alliance with Germany on 2 August 1914. It joined the war
on the side of the Central Powers on 29 October 1914.
e. The United States declared war on Austria-Hungary on 7 December 1917.
f. Austria was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary.
g. The United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917.
h. Hungary was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary.
i. Although the Treaty of Sèvres was intended to end the war between the Allied Powers and the
Ottoman Empire, the Allied Powers and the Republic of Turkey, the successor state of the
Ottoman Empire, agreed to the Treaty of Lausanne.
j. Often abbreviated as WWI or WW1; also called the Great War.
k. Only the Triple Alliance was a formal "alliance"; the others listed were informal patterns of support.
l. German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the Skagerrak"
m. Bessarabia remained part of Romania until 1940, when it was annexed by Joseph Stalin as the
Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic;
[160]
 following the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, it became
the independent Republic of Moldova
n. Unlike the others, the successor state to the Russian Empire, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, retained similar external borders, via retaining or quickly recovering lost territories.
o. A German attempt to use chemical weapons on the Russian front in January 1915 failed to cause
casualties.
Unexploded ordnance
See also
Footnotes
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 36/59
p. 109
 in this context – see Long and short scales
q. World War I officially ended when Germany paid off the final amount of reparations imposed on it
by the Allies.[299][300][301][302]
1. Shapiro & Epstein 2006, p. 329.
2. Proffitt, Michael (13 June 2014). "Chief Editor's notes June 2014" (https://web.archive.org/web/202
20415031658/https://public.oed.com/blog/june-2014-update-chief-editors-notes-june-2014/).
Oxford English Dictionary's blog. Archived from the original (https://public.oed.com/blog/june-2014
-update-chief-editors-notes-june-2014/) on 15 April 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022.
3. "The First World War" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140103043739/https://qi.com/infocloud/the-fi
rst-world-war). Quite Interesting. Archived from the original (http://qi.com/infocloud/the-first-worldwar) on 3 January 2014. Also aired on QI Series I Episode 2, 16 September 2011, BBC Two.
4. Braybon 2004, p. 8.
5. "The Great War" (https://archive.org/details/independen79v80newy/page/n233/mode/1up?view=th
eater). The Independent. 17 August 1914. p. 228. Retrieved 17 May 2022.
6. "great, adj., adv., and n" (http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/81104). Oxford English Dictionary.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190514194006/https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/81104)
from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2012.
7. "The war to end all wars" (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/special_report/1998/10/98/world_war_i/19817
2.stm). BBC News. 10 November 1998. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150619035838/h
ttp://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/special_report/1998/10/98/world_war_i/198172.stm) from the original on
19 June 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015.
8. Clark 2013, pp. 121–152.
9. Zeldin 1977, p. 117.
10. Bertrand Joly, "La France et la Revanche (1871-1914)", Revue d’Histoire Moderne &
Contemporaine. 1999, vol. 46-2, pp. 325-347 [1] (https://www.persee.fr/doc/rhmc_0048-8003_199
9_num_46_2_1965) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240127144111/https://www.persee.f
r/doc/rhmc_0048-8003_1999_num_46_2_1965) 27 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine
11. Keegan 1998, p. 52.
12. Medlicott 1945, pp. 66–70.
13. Keenan 1986, p. 20.
14. Willmott 2003, p. 15.
15. Fay 1930, pp. 290–293.
16. Willmott 2003, p. 21.
17. Herwig 1988, pp. 72–73.
18. Moll & Luebbert 1980, pp. 153–185.
19. Stevenson 2016, p. 45.
20. Crisp 1976, pp. 174–196.
21. Stevenson 2016, p. 42.
22. McMeekin 2015, pp. 66–67.
23. Clark 2013, p. 86.
24. Clark 2013, pp. 251–252.
25. McMeekin 2015, p. 69.
26. McMeekin 2015, p. 73.
References
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 37/59
27. Willmott 2003, pp. 2–23.
28. Clark 2013, p. 288.
29. Keegan 1998, pp. 48–49.
30. Finestone & Massie 1981, p. 247.
31. Smith 2010.
32. Roger L. Ransom (2018). Gambling on War: Confidence, Fear, and the Tragedy of the First World
War. Cambridge University Press. p. 51. ISBN 9781108485029.
33. Butcher 2014, p. 103.
34. Butcher 2014, pp. 188–189.
35. Gilbert 1994, p. 16.
36. Gilbert 1994, p. 17.
37. Willmott 2003, p. 26.
38. Clark, Christopher (25 June 2014). Month of Madness (https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03t7p
27). BBC Radio 4. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170420031224/http://www.bbc.co.uk/p
rogrammes/b03t7p27) from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2017.
39. Djordjević, Dimitrije; Spence, Richard B. (1992). Scholar, patriot, mentor: historical essays in
honor of Dimitrije Djordjević (https://books.google.com/books?id=CDJpAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA313).
East European Monographs. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-88033-217-0. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20240217084004/https://books.google.com/books?id=CDJpAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA313) from
the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 12 November 2018. "Following the assassination of
Franz Ferdinand in June 1914, Croats and Muslims in Sarajevo joined forces in an anti-Serb
pogrom."
40. Reports Service: Southeast Europe series (https://books.google.com/books?id=QGtWAAAAMAA
J). American Universities Field Staff. 1964. p. 44. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230906
101816/https://books.google.com/books?id=QGtWAAAAMAAJ) from the original on 6 September
2023. Retrieved 7 December 2013. "... the assassination was followed by officially encouraged
anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo ..."
41. Kröll, Herbert (2008). Austrian-Greek encounters over the centuries: history, diplomacy, politics,
arts, economics (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJRnAAAAMAAJ). Studienverlag. p. 55.
ISBN 978-3-7065-4526-6. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083931/https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=uJRnAAAAMAAJ) from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved
1 September 2013. "... arrested and interned some 5.500 prominent Serbs and sentenced to
death some 460 persons, a new Schutzkorps, an auxiliary militia, widened the anti-Serb
repression."
42. Tomasevich 2001, p. 485.
43. Schindler, John R. (2007). Unholy Terror: Bosnia, Al-Qa'ida, and the Rise of Global Jihad (https://b
ooks.google.com/books?id=c8Xb6x2XYvIC&pg=PA29). Zenith Imprint. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-61673-
964-5. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083936/https://books.google.com/books?id
=c8Xb6x2XYvIC&pg=PA29#v=onepage&q&f=false) from the original on 17 February 2024.
Retrieved 12 November 2018.
44. Velikonja 2003, p. 141.
45. Stevenson 1996, p. 12.
46. MacMillan 2013, p. 532.
47. Willmott 2003, p. 27.
48. Fromkin 2004, pp. 196–197.
49. MacMillan 2013, p. 536.
50. Lieven 2016, p. 326.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 38/59
51. Clark 2013, pp. 526–527.
52. Martel 2014, p. 335.
53. Gilbert 1994, p. 27.
54. Clayton 2003, p. 45.
55. Clark 2013, pp. 539–541.
56. Gilbert 1994, p. 29.
57. Coogan 2009, p. 48.
58. McMeekin 2014, pp. 342, 349.
59. MacMillan 2013, pp. 579–580, 585.
60. Crowe 2001, pp. 4–5.
61. Willmott 2003, p. 29.
62. Clark 2013, pp. 550–551.
63. Strachan 2003, pp. 292–296, 343–354.
64. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 172.
65. Schindler 2002, pp. 159–195.
66. "Veliki rat – Avijacija" (http://www.rts.rs/page/stories/sr/story/125/Dru%C5%A1tvo/1516279/Veliki+r
at+-+avijacija.html). rts.rs. RTS, Radio televizija Srbije, Radio Television of Serbia. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20170710083934/http://www.rts.rs/page/stories/sr/story/125/Dru%C5%A1
tvo/1516279/Veliki+rat+-+avijacija.html) from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2019.
67. "How was the first military airplane shot down" (http://www.nationalgeographic.rs/vesti/3842-prvi-ra
tni-avion-oboren-u-istoriji-pao-na-kragujevac.html). National Geographic. Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20150831011608/http://www.nationalgeographic.rs/vesti/3842-prvi-ratni-avion-obore
n-u-istoriji-pao-na-kragujevac.html) from the original on 31 August 2015. Retrieved 5 August 2015.
68. Stevenson 2004, p. 22.
69. Horne 1964, p. 22.
70. Stevenson 2004, p. 23.
71. Holmes 2014, pp. 194, 211.
72. Stevenson 2012, p. 54.
73. Jackson 2018, p. 55.
74. Lieven 2016, p. 327.
75. Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 376–378.
76. Horne 1964, p. 221.
77. Donko 2012, p. 79.
78. Keegan 1998, pp. 224–232.
79. Falls 1960, pp. 79–80.
80. Farwell 1989, p. 353.
81. Brown 1994, pp. 197–198.
82. Brown 1994, pp. 201–203.
83. Kant, Vedica (24 September 2014). "India and WWI: Piecing together the impact of the Great War
on the subcontinent" (https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/southasia/2014/09/24/piecing-together-the-impact-of-t
he-great-war-on-india/). LSE. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220928184956/https://blog
s.lse.ac.uk/southasia/2014/09/24/piecing-together-the-impact-of-the-great-war-on-india/) from the
original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 39/59
84. "Participants from the Indian subcontinent in the First World War" (http://www.mgtrust.org/ind1.ht
m). Memorial Gates Trust. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190701062212/http://www.mgt
rust.org/ind1.htm) from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2008.
85. Horniman, Benjamin Guy (1984). British administration and the Amritsar massacre. Mittal
Publications. p. 45.
86. Raudzens 1990, p. 424.
87. Raudzens 1990, pp. 421–423.
88. Gilbert 1994, p. 99.
89. Goodspeed 1985, p. 199.
90. Duffy, Michael (22 August 2009). "Weapons of War: Poison Gas" (http://www.firstworldwar.com/we
aponry/gas.htm). Firstworldwar.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070821004525/htt
p://www.firstworldwar.com/weaponry/gas.htm) from the original on 21 August 2007. Retrieved
5 July 2012.
91. Love 1996.
92. Dupuy 1993, p. 1042.
93. Grant 2005, p. 276.
94. Lichfield, John (21 February 2006). "Verdun: myths and memories of the 'lost villages' of France"
(https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/verdun-myths-and-memories-of-the-lost-villag
es-of-france-5335493.html). The Independent. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2017102223
5418/http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/verdun-myths-and-memories-of-the-lost-vil
lages-of-france-5335493.html) from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2013.
95. Harris 2008, p. 271.
96. Taylor 2007, pp. 39–47.
97. Keene 2006, p. 5.
98. Halpern 1995, p. 293.
99. Zieger 2001, p. 50.
100. Jeremy Black (June 2016). "Jutland's Place in History". Naval History. 30 (3): 16–21.
101. Sheffield, Garry. "The First Battle of the Atlantic" (https://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/
battle_atlantic_ww1_01.shtml). World Wars in Depth. BBC. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
20190603135501/http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/battle_atlantic_ww1_01.shtml)
from the original on 3 June 2019. Retrieved 11 November 2009.
102. Gilbert 1994, p. 306.
103. von der Porten 1969.
104. Jones 2001, p. 80.
105. Nova Scotia House of Assembly Committee on Veterans Affairs (9 November 2006). "Committee
Hansard" (http://nslegislature.ca/index.php/committees/committee_hansard/C11/va_2006nov09).
Hansard. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20111123113612/http://nslegislature.ca/index.php/
committees/committee_hansard/C11/va_2006nov09) from the original on 23 November 2011.
Retrieved 12 March 2013.
106. Chickering, Roger; Förster, Stig; Greiner, Bernd (2005). A world at total war: global conflict and the
politics of destruction, 1937–1945 (https://books.google.com/books?id=evVPoSwqrG4C&pg=PA7
3). Publications of the German Historical Institute. Washington, DC: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-83432-2. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083931/https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=evVPoSwqrG4C&pg=PA73#v=onepage&q&f=false) from the original on 17
February 2024. Retrieved 12 November 2018.
107. Price 1980
108. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 241– (https://books.google.com/books?id=2YqjfHLyyj8C).
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 40/59
109. Neiberg 2005, pp. 54–55.
110. Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 1075–1076.
111. DiNardo 2015, p. 102.
112. Neiberg 2005, pp. 108–110.
113. Hall, Richard (2010). Balkan Breakthrough: The Battle of Dobro Pole 1918. Indiana University
Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-253-35452-5.
114. "The Balkan Wars and World War I (https://archive.org/stream/PAM550-99/PAM550-99_djvu.txt)".
p. 28. Library of Congress Country Studies.
115. Tucker, Wood & Murphy 1999, pp. 150–152.
116. Korsun, N. "The Balkan Front of the World War" (http://militera.lib.ru/h/korsun_ng4/06.html) (in
Russian). militera.lib.ru. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130809073504/http://militera.lib.r
u/h/korsun_ng4/06.html) from the original on 9 August 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2010.
117. Doughty 2005, p. 491.
118. Gettleman, Marvin; Schaar, Stuart, eds. (2003). The Middle East and Islamic world reader (https://
books.google.com/books?id=srLGT3dwTogC) (4th ed.). New York: Grove Press. pp. 119–120.
ISBN 978-0-8021-3936-8.
119. January, Brendan (2007). Genocide: modern crimes against humanity (https://books.google.com/b
ooks?id=IoPMDp2WA6cC). Minneapolis, Minn.: Twenty-First Century Books. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-
7613-3421-7.
120. Lieberman, Benjamin (2013). The Holocaust and Genocides in Europe (https://books.google.com/
books?id=ySFMAQAAQBAJ). New York: Continuum Publishing Corporation. pp. 80–81.
ISBN 978-1-4411-9478-7.
121. Arthur J. Barker, The Neglected War: Mesopotamia, 1914–1918 (London: Faber, 1967)
122. Crawford, John; McGibbon, Ian (2007). New Zealand's Great War: New Zealand, the Allies and
the First World War (https://books.google.com/books?id=mtEEuD_-2SMC&pg=PA219). Exisle
Publishing. pp. 219–220.
123. Fromkin 2004, p. 119.
124. Hinterhoff 1984, pp. 499–503
125. The Encyclopedia Americana, 1920, v. 28, p. 403
126. Northcote, Dudley S. (1922). "Saving Forty Thousand Armenians" (https://books.google.com/book
s?id=4LYqAAAAYAAJ). Current History. New York Times Co. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20210909113528/https://books.google.com/books?id=4LYqAAAAYAAJ) from the original on 9
September 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2021.
127. Sachar 1970, pp. 122–138.
128. Gilbert 1994.
129. Hanioglu, M. Sukru (2010). A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire. Princeton University
Press. pp. 180–181. ISBN 978-0-691-13452-9.
130. Thompson 2009, p. 13.
131. Thompson 2009, pp. 9–10.
132. Gardner 2015, p. 120.
133. Thompson 2009, p. 14.
134. Thompson 2009, pp. 30–31.
135. Gilbert 1994, p. 166.
136. Thompson 2009, p. 57.
137. Marshall & Josephy 1982, p. 108.
138. Fornassin 2017, pp. 39–62.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 41/59
139. Thompson 2009, p. 163.
140. Gilbert 1994, p. 317.
141. Gilbert 1994, p. 482.
142. Gilbert 1994, p. 484.
143. Thompson 2009, p. 364.
144. Gilbert 1994, p. 491.
145. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 715.
146. Meyer 2006, pp. 152–154, 161, 163, 175, 182.
147. Smele
148. Schindler 2003, p. ?.
149. Tucker 2002, p. 119.
150. Lawrence Goodrich (2011). Cultural Studies (https://books.google.com/books?id=wErHyRve0noC
&pg=PA376). Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 376. ISBN 9781449637286. Archived (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20230820043510/https://books.google.com/books?id=wErHyRve0noC&pg=PA376)
from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023.
151. Jelavich 1992, pp. 441–442.
152. Dumitru 2012, p. 171.
153. Dumitru 2012, p. 170.
154. Gilbert 1994, p. 282.
155. Torrie 1978, pp. 7–8.
156. Barrett 2013, pp. 96–98.
157. România în anii primului război mondial, vol.2, p. 831
158. Crampton 1994, pp. 24–25.
159. Béla 1998, p. 429.
160. Rothschild 1975, p. 314.
161. Alexander Lanoszka; Michael A. Hunzeker (11 November 2018). "Why the First War lasted so
long" (https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/11/11/why-the-first-world-war
-lasted-so-long/?). The Washington Post. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220412030938/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/11/11/why-the-first-world-war-lasted
-so-long/) from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
162. Keegan 1998, p. 345.
163. Kernek 1970, pp. 721–766.
164. Beckett 2007, p. 523.
165. Winter 2014, pp. 110–132.
166. Wheeler-Bennett 1938, pp. 36–41.
167. Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers in May 1918
168. R. J. Crampton, Eastern Europe in the twentieth century, Routledge, 1994, ISBN 978-0-415-
05346-4, pp. 24–25
169. Stevenson 2012, pp. 315–316.
170. Stevenson 2012, p. 317.
171. Gilbert 1994, p. 318.
172. Grotelueschen 2006, pp. 14–15.
173. Stevenson 2012, p. 318.
174. Grotelueschen 2006, pp. 44–46.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 42/59
175. Stevenson 2012, p. 403.
176. Clayton 2003, p. 124.
177. Clayton 2003, p. 129.
178. Strachan 2003, p. 244.
179. Inglis 1995, p. 2.
180. Humphries 2007, p. 66.
181. Horne 1964, p. 323.
182. Clayton 2003, p. 131.
183. Erickson 2001, p. 163.
184. Moore, A. Briscoe (1920). The Mounted Riflemen in Sinai & Palestine: The Story of New Zealand's
Crusaders. Christchurch: Whitcombe & Tombs. p. 67. OCLC 156767391 (https://www.worldcat.or
g/oclc/156767391).
185. Falls, Cyril (1930). Military Operations. Part I Egypt & Palestine: Volume 2 From June 1917 to the
End of the War. Official History of the Great War Based on Official Documents by Direction of the
Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defence. Maps compiled by A.F. Becke. London:
HM Stationery Office. p. 59. OCLC 1113542987 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1113542987).
186. Wavell, Earl (1968) [1933]. "The Palestine Campaigns". In Sheppard, Eric William (ed.). A Short
History of the British Army (4th ed.). London: Constable & Co. pp. 153–155. OCLC 35621223 (http
s://www.worldcat.org/oclc/35621223).
187. "Text of the Decree of the Surrender of Jerusalem into British Control" (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20110614214531/http://www.firstworldwar.com/source/jerusalemdecree.htm). First World
War.com. Archived from the original (http://www.firstworldwar.com/source/jerusalemdecree.htm)
on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2015.
188. Bruce, Anthony (2002). The Last Crusade: The Palestine Campaign in the First World War.
London: John Murray. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-7195-5432-2.
189. "Who's Who – Kress von Kressenstein" (http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/kressenstein.htm). First
World War.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20151120122815/http://firstworldwar.com/bi
o/kressenstein.htm) from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 13 May 2015.
190. "Who's Who – Otto Liman von Sanders" (http://www.firstworldwar.com/bio/liman.htm). First World
War.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20071227070027/http://www.firstworldwar.com/bi
o/liman.htm) from the original on 27 December 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2015.
191. Erickson 2001, p. 195.
192. Ayers 1919, p. 104.
193. Heyman 1997, pp. 146–147.
194. Westwell 2004.
195. Gray 1991, p. 86.
196. Rickard 2007.
197. Schreiber, Shane B. (2004) [1977]. Shock Army of the British Empire: The Canadian Corps in the
Last 100 Days of the Great War (https://archive.org/details/shockarmyofbriti0000schr/mode/2up).
St. Catharines, ON: Vanwell. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-55125-096-0. OCLC 57063659 (https://www.world
cat.org/oclc/57063659).
198. Rickard 2001.
199. Brown, Malcolm (1999) [1998]. 1918: Year of Victory. London: Pan. p. 190. ISBN 978-0-330-
37672-3.
200. Gray & Argyle 1990
201. McLellan, p. 49.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 43/59
202. Christie 1997, p. ?.
203. "The Battle of Dobro Polje – The Forgotten Balkan Skirmish That Ended WW1" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20170923215523/http://militaryhistorynow.com/2017/09/21/knock-out-blow-at-dobro-polj
e-six-facts-about-the-obscure-battle-that-ended-ww1/). Militaryhistorynow.com. Archived from the
original (https://militaryhistorynow.com/2017/09/21/knock-out-blow-at-dobro-polje-six-facts-about-t
he-obscure-battle-that-ended-ww1/) on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 21 November 2019.
204. "The Germans Could no Longer Keep up the Fight" (https://historycollection.co/ten-facts-battle-do
bro-polje-battle-led-allied-victory-world-war/9/). historycollection.co. 22 February 2017. Archived (h
ttps://web.archive.org/web/20191223025225/https://historycollection.co/ten-facts-battle-dobro-polj
e-battle-led-allied-victory-world-war/9/) from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved
21 November 2019.
205. "1918 Timeline" (http://www.indiana.edu/~league/1918.htm). League of Nations Photo Archive.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160505134716/http://www.indiana.edu/~league/1918.ht
m) from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2009.
206. "The Battle of Dobro Polje – The Forgotten Balkan Skirmish That Ended WW1" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20170923215523/http://militaryhistorynow.com/2017/09/21/knock-out-blow-at-dobro-polj
e-six-facts-about-the-obscure-battle-that-ended-ww1/). Militaryhistorynow.com. 21 September
2017. Archived from the original (https://militaryhistorynow.com/2017/09/21/knock-out-blow-at-dobr
o-polje-six-facts-about-the-obscure-battle-that-ended-ww1/) on 23 September 2017. Retrieved
21 November 2019.
207. "The Germans Could no Longer Keep up the Fight" (https://historycollection.co/ten-facts-battle-do
bro-polje-battle-led-allied-victory-world-war/9/). historycollection.com. 22 February 2017. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20191223025225/https://historycollection.co/ten-facts-battle-dobro-po
lje-battle-led-allied-victory-world-war/9/) from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved
21 November 2019.
208. Axelrod 2018, p. 260.
209. Andrea di Michele (2014). "Trento, Bolzano e Innsbruck: l'occupazione militare italiana del Tirolo
(1918–1920)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20181002053915/http://www.agiati.it/UploadDocs/1225
5_Art_20_di_michele.pdf) [Trento, Bolzano and Innsbruck: The Italian Military Occupation of Tyrol
(1918–1920)] (PDF). Trento e Trieste. Percorsi degli Italiani d'Austria dal '48 all'annessione (in
Italian): 436–437. Archived from the original (http://www.agiati.it/UploadDocs/12255_Art_20_di_mi
chele.pdf) (PDF) on 2 October 2018. "La forza numerica del contingente italiano variò con il
passare dei mesi e al suo culmine raggiunse i 20–22.000 uomini. [The numerical strength of the
Italian contingent varied with the passing of months and at its peak reached 20–22,000 men.]"
210. "Clairière de l'Armistice" (https://web.archive.org/web/20070827142334/http://www.compiegne.fr/d
ecouvrir/clairierearmistice.asp) (in French). Ville de Compiègne. Archived from the original (http://
www.compiegne.fr/decouvrir/clairierearmistice.asp) on 27 August 2007.
211. Stevenson 2004, p. 385.
212. K. Kuhl. "Die 14 Kieler Punkte" (http://www.kurkuhl.de/docs/kieler_14punkte.pdf) [The Kiel 14
points] (PDF). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190412035214/http://www.kurkuhl.de/doc
s/kieler_14punkte.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2018.
213. Dähnhardt, D. (1978). Revolution in Kiel. Neumünster: Karl Wachholtz Verlag. p. 91. ISBN 978-3-
529-02636-2.
214. Wette, Wolfram (2006). "Die Novemberrevolution – Kiel 1918". In Fleischhauer; Turowski (eds.).
Kieler Erinnerungsorte. Boyens.
215. Stevenson 2004, p. 383.
216. Stevenson 2004, Chapter 17.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 44/59
217. "France's oldest WWI veteran dies" (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7199127.stm) Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20161028021340/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7199127.stm) 28
October 2016 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 20 January 2008.
218. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 273 (https://books.google.com/books?id=2YqjfHLyyj8C&pg=PA273)
219. Hastedt, Glenn P. (2009). Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy. Infobase Publishing. p. 483.
ISBN 978-1-4381-0989-3.
220. Murrin, John; Johnson, Paul; McPherson, James; Gerstle, Gary; Fahs, Alice (2010). Liberty,
Equality, Power: A History of the American People. Vol. II. Cengage Learning. p. 622. ISBN 978-0-
495-90383-3.
221. "Harding Ends War; Signs Peace Decree at Senator's Home. Thirty Persons Witness Momentous
Act in Frelinghuysen Living Room at Raritan" (https://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F1
0B13F63C5D14738DDDAA0894DF405B818EF1D3). The New York Times. 3 July 1921. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20131204011723/http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F10
B13F63C5D14738DDDAA0894DF405B818EF1D3) from the original on 4 December 2013.
Retrieved 18 September 2017.
222. "No. 31773" (https://www.thegazette.co.uk/London/issue/31773/page/1671). The London Gazette.
10 February 1920. p. 1671.
223. "No. 31991" (https://www.thegazette.co.uk/London/issue/31991/page/7765). The London Gazette.
23 July 1920. pp. 7765–7766.
224. "No. 13627" (https://www.thegazette.co.uk/London/issue/13627/page/1924). The London Gazette.
27 August 1920. p. 1924.
225. "No. 32421" (https://www.thegazette.co.uk/London/issue/32421/page/6371). The London Gazette.
12 August 1921. pp. 6371–6372.
226. "No. 32964" (https://www.thegazette.co.uk/London/issue/32964/page/6030). The London Gazette.
12 August 1924. pp. 6030–6031.
227. "Dates on war memorials" (http://www.warmemorials.org/uploads/publications/117.pdf) (PDF). War
Memorials Trust. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210112055457/http://www.warmemorial
s.org/uploads/publications/117.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved
4 January 2021.
228. Ide, Tobias; Bruch, Carl; Carius, Alexander; Conca, Ken; Dabelko, Geoffrey D.; Matthew, Richard;
Weinthal, Erika (2021). "The past and future(s) of environmental peacebuilding" (https://academic.
oup.com/ia/article/97/1/1/6041492?searchresult=1). International Affairs. 97: 1–16.
doi:10.1093/ia/iiaa177 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fia%2Fiiaa177). Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20210129125540/https://academic.oup.com/ia/article/97/1/1/6041492?searchresult=1) from
the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2021.
229. Magliveras 1999, pp. 8–12.
230. Northedge 1986, pp. 35–36.
231. Morrow, John H. (2005). The Great War: An Imperial History. London: Routledge. p. 290.
ISBN 978-0-415-20440-8.
232. Schulze, Hagen (1998). Germany: A New History (https://books.google.com/books?id=B84ZaAdG
bS4C&pg=PA204). Harvard U.P. p. 204.
233. Ypersele, Laurence Van (2012). "Mourning and Memory, 1919–45". In Horne, John (ed.). A
Companion to World War I (https://books.google.com/books?id=EjZHLXRKjtEC&pg=PA584).
Wiley. p. 584.
234. "The Surrogate Hegemon in Polish Postcolonial Discourse Ewa Thompson, Rice University" (htt
p://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~ethomp/The%20Surrogate%20Hegemon.pdf) (PDF). Archived (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20131029211408/http://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~ethomp/The%20Surrogate%20
Hegemon.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2013.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 45/59
235. "Open-Site:Hungary" (http://open-site.org/Regional/Europe/Hungary). Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20220103140810/http://open-site.org/Regional/Europe/Hungary) from the original on 3
January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022.
236. Frucht, p. 356.
237. Kocsis, Károly; Hodosi, Eszter Kocsisné (1998). Ethnic Geography of the Hungarian Minorities in
the Carpathian Basin. Geographical Research Institute, Research Centre and Earth Sciences.
p. 19. ISBN 978-963-7395-84-0.
238. Clark 1927.
239. "Appeals to Americans to Pray for Serbians" (https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/19
18/07/27/102727338.pdf) (PDF). The New York Times. 27 July 1918. Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20180916183729/https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1918/07/27/102727
338.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
240. "Serbia Restored" (https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1918/11/05/98273895.pdf)
(PDF). The New York Times. 5 November 1918. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201809161
83845/https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1918/11/05/98273895.pdf) (PDF) from the
original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
241. Simpson, Matt (22 August 2009). "The Minor Powers During World War One – Serbia" (http://www.
firstworldwar.com/features/minorpowers_serbia.htm). firstworldwar.com. Archived (https://web.arch
ive.org/web/20100427065927/http://www.firstworldwar.com/features/minorpowers_serbia.htm)
from the original on 27 April 2010. Retrieved 27 May 2010.
242. Cas Mudde. Racist Extremism in Central and Eastern Europe (https://books.google.com/books?id
=bNp6CAlMMcUC&dq=%22term+greater+romania%22&pg=PA190) Archived (https://web.archive.
org/web/20160515100954/https://books.google.com/books?id=bNp6CAlMMcUC#v=onepage&q
=%22term%20greater%20romania%22&f=false) 15 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine
243. " 'ANZAC Day' in London; King, Queen, and General Birdwood at Services in Abbey" (https://www.
nytimes.com/1916/04/26/archives/anzac-day-in-london-king-queen-and-general-birdwood-at-servi
ces-in.html). The New York Times. 26 April 1916. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160715
010040/http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9400E1DD113FE233A25755C2A9629C94
6796D6CF&scp=12&sq=New+Zealand+anzac&st=p) from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved
25 July 2018.
244. Australian War Memorial. "The ANZAC Day tradition" (https://web.archive.org/web/200805011632
12/http://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/anzac/anzac_tradition.asp). Australian War Memorial.
Archived from the original (http://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/anzac/anzac_tradition.asp) on
1 May 2008. Retrieved 2 May 2008.
245. "The Diaspora Welcomes the Pope" (http://www.spiegel.de/international/0,1518,451140,00.html)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120604185021/http://www.spiegel.de/international/0%2C
1518%2C451140%2C00.html) 4 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Der Spiegel Online. 28
November 2006.
246. Rummel, R.J. (1998). "The Holocaust in Comparative and Historical Perspective". Idea Journal of
Social Issues. 3 (2).
247. Hedges, Chris (17 September 2000). "A Few Words in Greek Tell of a Homeland Lost" (https://ww
w.nytimes.com/2000/09/17/nyregion/a-few-words-in-greek-tell-of-a-homeland-lost.html). The New
York Times. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181125062332/https://www.nytimes.com/200
0/09/17/nyregion/a-few-words-in-greek-tell-of-a-homeland-lost.html) from the original on 25
November 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2017.
248. Kitchen 2000, p. 22.
249. Sévillia, Jean, Histoire Passionnée de la France, 2013, p. 395
250. Howard 1993, p. 166.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 46/59
251. Saadi 2009.
252. Patenaude, Bertrand M. (30 January 2007). "Food as a Weapon" (https://web.archive.org/web/200
80719190529/http://www.hoover.org/publications/digest/6731711.html). Hoover Digest. Hoover
Institution. Archived from the original (http://www.hoover.org/publications/digest/6731711.html) on
19 July 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
253. Ball 1994, pp. 16, 211.
254. "The Russians are coming (Russian influence in Harbin, Manchuria, China; economic relations)"
(https://web.archive.org/web/20070510153951/http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-16051029.htm
l). The Economist (US). 14 January 1995. Archived from the original (http://www.highbeam.com/do
c/1G1-16051029.html) on 10 May 2007.
255. Tschanz.
256. Conlon.
257. Taliaferro 1972, p. 65.
258. Spreeuwenberg 2018, pp. 2561–2567.
259. Knobler et al. 2005.
260. Ansart, Séverine; Pelat, Camille; Boelle, Pierre-Yves; Carrat, Fabrice; Flahault, Antoine; Valleron,
Alain-Jacques (May 2009). "Mortality burden of the 1918–1919 influenza pandemic in Europe" (htt
ps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4634693). Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses.
Wiley. 3 (3): 99–106. doi:10.1111/j.1750-2659.2009.00080.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1750-265
9.2009.00080.x). PMC 4634693 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4634693).
PMID 19453486 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19453486).
261. K. von Economo.Wiener klinische Wochenschrift, 10 May 1917, 30: 581–585. Die Encephalitis
lethargica. Leipzig and Vienna, Franz Deuticke, 1918.
262. Reid, A.H.; McCall, S.; Henry, J.M.; Taubenberger, J.K. (2001). "Experimenting on the Past: The
Enigma of von Economo's Encephalitis Lethargica" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fjnen%2F60.7.66
3). J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 60 (7): 663–670. doi:10.1093/jnen/60.7.663 (https://doi.org/10.109
3%2Fjnen%2F60.7.663). PMID 11444794 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11444794).
S2CID 40754090 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:40754090).
263. "War Horse – The True Story" (https://www.albertaanimalhealthsource.ca/content/war-horse-true-s
tory). Alberta Animal Health Source. 10 November 2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20
240108180307/https://www.albertaanimalhealthsource.ca/content/war-horse-true-story) from the
original on 8 January 2024. Retrieved 8 January 2024.
264. Fitzgerald, Gerard (April 2008). "Chemical Warfare and Medical Response During World War I" (ht
tps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2376985). American Journal of Public Health. 98 (4):
611–625. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2007.11930 (https://doi.org/10.2105%2FAJPH.2007.11930).
PMC 2376985 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2376985). PMID 18356568 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18356568).
265. Schneider, Barry R. (28 February 1999). Future War and Counterproliferation: US Military
Responses to NBC. Praeger. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-275-96278-4.
266. Taylor, Telford (1993). The Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials: A Personal Memoir (https://archive.or
g/details/anatomyofnuremb00tayl/page/34). Little, Brown and Company. p. 34 (https://archive.org/
details/anatomyofnuremb00tayl/page/34). ISBN 978-0-316-83400-1. Retrieved 20 June 2013 – via
Internet Archive.
267. Graham, Thomas; Lavera, Damien J. (2003). Cornerstones of Security: Arms Control Treaties in
the Nuclear Era (https://books.google.com/books?id=0PYx0j3wRvAC&pg=PA7). University of
Washington Press. pp. 7–9. ISBN 978-0-295-98296-0. Retrieved 5 July 2013.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 47/59
268. Henry Morgenthau (1918). "XXV: Talaat Tells Why He "Deports" the Armenians" (http://net.lib.byu.
edu/~rdh7/wwi/comment/morgenthau/Morgen25.htm). Ambassador Mogenthau's story. Brigham
Young University. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120612014938/http://net.lib.byu.edu/~r
dh7/wwi/comment/morgenthau/Morgen25.htm) from the original on 12 June 2012. Retrieved
6 June 2012.
269. International Association of Genocide Scholars (13 June 2005). "Open Letter to the Prime Minister
of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071006024502/http://www.geno
cidewatch.org/TurkishPMIAGSOpenLetterreArmenia6-13-05.htm). Archived from the original (htt
p://www.genocidewatch.org/TurkishPMIAGSOpenLetterreArmenia6-13-05.htm) on 6 October
2007.
270. Vartparonian, Paul Leverkuehn; Kaiser (2008). A German officer during the Armenian genocide: a
biography of Max von Scheubner-Richter (https://books.google.com/books?id=_hItAQAAIAAJ).
translated by Alasdair Lean; with a preface by Jorge and a historical introduction by Hilmar.
London: Taderon Press for the Gomidas Institute. ISBN 978-1-903656-81-5. Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20170326152834/https://books.google.com/books?id=_hItAQAAIAAJ) from the
original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2016.
271. Ferguson 2006, p. 177.
272. "International Association of Genocide Scholars" (https://wayback.archive-it.org/all/201710100715
06/http://www.genocidescholars.org/sites/default/files/document%09%5Bcurrent-page%3A1%5D/
documents/US%20Congress_%20Armenian%20Resolution.pdf) (PDF). Archived from the original
(http://www.genocidescholars.org/sites/default/files/document%09%5Bcurrent-page%3A1%5D/do
cuments/US%20Congress_%20Armenian%20Resolution.pdf) (PDF) on 10 October 2017.
Retrieved 12 March 2013.
273. Fromkin 1989, pp. 212–215.
274. International Association of Genocide Scholars. "Resolution on genocides committed by the
Ottoman empire" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080422005726/http://genocidescholars.org/imag
es/Resolution_on_genocides_committed_by_the_Ottoman_Empire.pdf) (PDF). Archived from the
original (http://www.genocidescholars.org/images/Resolution_on_genocides_committed_by_the_
Ottoman_Empire.pdf) (PDF) on 22 April 2008.
275. Gaunt, David (2006). Massacres, Resistance, Protectors: Muslim-Christian Relations in Eastern
Anatolia during World War I (https://books.google.com/books?id=4mug9LrpLKcC). Piscataway,
New Jersey: Gorgias Press.
276. Schaller, Dominik J.; Zimmerer, Jürgen (2008). "Late Ottoman genocides: the dissolution of the
Ottoman Empire and Young Turkish population and extermination policies – introduction". Journal
of Genocide Research. 10 (1): 7–14. doi:10.1080/14623520801950820 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2
F14623520801950820). S2CID 71515470 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:71515470).
277. Whitehorn, Alan (2015). The Armenian Genocide: The Essential Reference Guide: The Essential
Reference Guide (https://books.google.com/books?id=0vrnCQAAQBAJ&pg=PA218). ABC-CLIO.
pp. 83, 218. ISBN 978-1-61069-688-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200801142141/htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=0vrnCQAAQBAJ&pg=PA218) from the original on 1 August
2020. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
278. Phillimore & Bellot 1919, pp. 4–64.
279. Ferguson 1999, pp. 368–369.
280. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 2733.
281. "Search Results (+(war:"worldwari")): Veterans History Project" (http://memory.loc.gov/diglib/vhp/s
earch?query=&field=all&war=worldwari). American Folklife Center, Library of Congress. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20170711001905/http://memory.loc.gov/diglib/vhp/search?query=&fie
ld=all&war=worldwari) from the original on 11 July 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017.
282. Havighurst 1985, p. 131.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 48/59
283. Ward, Alan J. (1974). "Lloyd George and the 1918 Irish conscription crisis". Historical Journal. 17
(1): 107–129. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00005689 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0018246X0000568
9). S2CID 162360809 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:162360809).
284. J.M. Main, Conscription: the Australian debate, 1901–1970 (1970) abstract (http://espace.library.u
q.edu.au/view/UQ:338722) Archived (https://archive.today/20150707113023/http://espace.library.u
q.edu.au/view/UQ:338722) 7 July 2015 at archive.today
285. "Commonwealth Parliament from 1901 to World War I" (https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/
Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1415/ComParl). Parliament of
Australia. 4 May 2015. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181215065914/https://www.aph.g
ov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1415/ComP
arl) from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018.
286. "The Conscription Crisis" (http://www.cbc.ca/history/EPISCONTENTSE1EP12CH2PA3LE.html).
CBC. 2001. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20140713134338/http://www.cbc.ca/history/EPI
SCONTENTSE1EP12CH2PA3LE.html) from the original on 13 July 2014. Retrieved 14 August
2014.
287. Chelmsford, J.E. "Clergy and Man-Power", The Times 15 April 1918, p. 12
288. Chambers, John Whiteclay (1987). To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes to Modern America (http
s://archive.org/details/toraisearmydr00cham). New York: The Free Press. ISBN 978-0-02-905820-
6.
289. Zinn, Howard (2003). A People's History of the United States. Harper Collins. p. 134.
290. Noakes, Lucy (2006). Women in the British Army: War and the Gentle Sex, 1907–1948. Abingdon,
England: Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-39056-9.
291. Cosgrave, Jenny (10 March 2015). "UK finally finishes paying for World War I" (https://www.cnbc.c
om/2015/03/09/uk-finally-finishes-paying-for-world-war-i.html). CNBC. Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20230320194802/https://www.cnbc.com/2015/03/09/uk-finally-finishes-paying-for-worldwar-i.html) from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023.
292. Green 1938, p. cxxvi.
293. Anton Kaes; Martin Jay; Edward Dimendberg, eds. (1994). "The Treaty of Versailles: The
Reparations Clauses" (https://books.google.com/books?id=J4A1gt4-VCsC&pg=PA8). The Weimar
Republic Sourcebook. University of California Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-520-90960-1. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20160115140046/https://books.google.com/books?id=J4A1gt4-VCsC&pg
=PA8) from the original on 15 January 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2015.
294. Marks 1978, pp. 231–232
295. Marks 1978, p. 237
296. Marks 1978, pp. 223–234
297. Stone, Norman (2008). World War One: A Short History. London: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-
103156-9.
298. Marks 1978, p. 233
299. Hall, Allan (28 September 2010). "First World War officially ends" (https://www.telegraph.co.uk/ne
ws/worldnews/europe/germany/8029948/First-World-War-officially-ends.html). The Telegraph.
Berlin. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220110/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worl
dnews/europe/germany/8029948/First-World-War-officially-ends.html) from the original on 10
January 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2017.
300. Suddath, Claire (4 October 2010). "Why Did World War I Just End?" (https://web.archive.org/web/
20101005193702/http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2023140,00.html). Time. Archived
from the original (http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2023140,00.html) on 5 October
2010. Retrieved 1 July 2013.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 49/59
301. "World War I to finally end for Germany this weekend" (http://news.blogs.cnn.com/2010/09/30/worl
d-war-i-to-finally-end-this-weekend/). CNN. 30 September 2010. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20170316204156/http://news.blogs.cnn.com/2010/09/30/world-war-i-to-finally-end-this-weeke
nd/) from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017.
302. MacMillan, Margaret (25 December 2010). "Ending the War to End All Wars" (https://www.nytimes.
com/2010/12/26/opinion/26macmillan.html). The New York Times. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20170316113814/http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/26/opinion/26macmillan.html) from the
original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017.
303. Souter 2000, p. 354.
304. "From Wristwatches To Radio, How World War I Ushered in the Modern World" (https://www.npr.or
g/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=521792062). NPR. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20180430115407/https://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=521792062)
from the original on 30 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
305. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1189.
306. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1001
307. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 117.
308. Mukhtar, Mohammed (2003). Historical Dictionary of Somalia (https://books.google.com/books?id
=DPwOsOcNy5YC&q=iyasu+dervish&pg=PA126). Scarecrow Press. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-8108-
6604-1. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210413230529/https://books.google.com/books?i
d=DPwOsOcNy5YC&q=iyasu+dervish&pg=PA126) from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved
28 February 2017.
309. "How Ethiopian prince scuppered Germany's WW1 plans" (https://www.bbc.com/news/world-3742
8682). BBC News. 25 September 2016. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200413121137/h
ttps://www.bbc.com/news/world-37428682) from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved
28 February 2017.
310. Ficquet, Éloi (2014). The Life and Times of Lïj Iyasu of Ethiopia: New Insights (https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=rMj7AgAAQBAJ&q=iyasu+alleged+conversion&pg=PA185). LIT Verlag Münster.
p. 185. ISBN 978-3-643-90476-8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210413230422/https://
books.google.com/books?id=rMj7AgAAQBAJ&q=iyasu+alleged+conversion&pg=PA185) from the
original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2020.
311. Zewde, Bahru. A history. p. 126.
312. Ficquet, Éloi (2014). The Life and Times of Lïj Iyasu of Ethiopia: New Insights (https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=rMj7AgAAQBAJ&q=bahru+zewde+doctored+photo&pg=PA62). LIT Verlag
Münster. p. 62. ISBN 978-3-643-90476-8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2021041402055
7/https://books.google.com/books?id=rMj7AgAAQBAJ&q=bahru+zewde+doctored+photo&pg=PA6
2) from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2020.
313. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1069.
314. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 884.
315. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 335.
316. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 219.
317. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 209.
318. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 596
319. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 826.
320. Denis Mack Smith. 1997. Modern Italy: A Political History. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan
Press. p. 284.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 50/59
321. "No Immediate Need. Te Awamutu Courier" (https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/TAWC1
9390922.2.37). paperspast.natlib.govt.nz. 22 September 1939. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20220616072636/https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/TAWC19390922.2.37) from
the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022.
322. "Chapter 4 – Response from the Home Front" (https://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-WH2-1H
om-c4.html). nzetc.victoria.ac.nz. 1986. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220806215043/ht
tps://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-WH2-1Hom-c4.html) from the original on 6 August 2022.
Retrieved 16 June 2022.
323. "5.2: Provincial patriotic councils" (https://oag.parliament.nz/2005/copy_of_2003-04/part5-2.htm).
Office of the Auditor-General New Zealand. 2005. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220519
045102/https://oag.parliament.nz/2005/copy_of_2003-04/part5-2.htm) from the original on 19 May
2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022.
324. Karp 1979
325. Pennell, Catriona (2012). A Kingdom United: Popular Responses to the Outbreak of the First
World War in Britain and Ireland. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-959058-2.
326. Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 584.
327. O'Halpin, Eunan, The Decline of the Union: British Government in Ireland, 1892–1920, (Dublin,
1987)
328. Lehmann & van der Veer 1999, p. 62.
329. Brock, Peter, These Strange Criminals: An Anthology of Prison Memoirs by Conscientious
Objectors to Military Service from the Great War to the Cold War, p. 14, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2004, ISBN 978-0-8020-8707-2
330. "Winchester Whisperer: The secret newspaper made by jailed pacifists" (https://www.bbc.com/new
s/uk-england-25749290). BBC News. 24 February 2014. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20
220207220011/https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-25749290) from the original on 7 February
2022. Retrieved 7 February 2022.
331. Richard Pipes (1990). The Russian Revolution (https://books.google.com/books?id=XtE54LuhFzE
C&pg=PA407). Knopf Doubleday. p. 407. ISBN 978-0-307-78857-3. Archived (https://web.archive.
org/web/20200801164146/https://books.google.com/books?id=XtE54LuhFzEC&pg=PA407) from
the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2019.
332. Seton-Watson, Christopher. 1967. Italy from Liberalism to Fascism: 1870 to 1925. London:
Methuen & Co. Ltd. p. 471
333. Lawson, Eric; Lawson, Jane (2002). The First Air Campaign: August 1914 – November 1918 (http
s://books.google.com/books?id=9PGHckhHiX0Cpg=PT123). Da Capo Press. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-
306-81213-2.
334. Hartcup 1988, p. 154.
335. Hartcup 1988, pp. 82–86.
336. Sterling, Christopher H. (2008). Military Communications: From Ancient Times to the 21st Century.
Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-732-6 p. 444.
337. Cross 1991
338. Cross 1991, pp. 56–57.
339. Stevenson 1988, p. .
340. Zeman, Z. A. B. (1971). Diplomatic History of the First World War (https://archive.org/details/diplo
matichistor0000zema). London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-00300-7.
341. See Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (1921). Scott, James Brown (ed.). Official
Statements of War Aims and Peace Proposals: December 1916 to November 1918 (https://archiv
e.org/details/cu31924016943106). Washington, D.C., The Endowment.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 51/59
342. "John McCrae" (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F100487b0). Nature. Historica. 100 (2521): 487–488.
1918. Bibcode:1918Natur.100..487. (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1918Natur.100..487.).
doi:10.1038/100487b0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F100487b0). S2CID 4275807 (https://api.seman
ticscholar.org/CorpusID:4275807).
343. David, Evans (1918). "John McCrae" (https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/john-mc
crae). Nature. 100 (2521): 487–488. Bibcode:1918Natur.100..487. (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/1918Natur.100..487.). doi:10.1038/100487b0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F100487b0).
S2CID 4275807 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4275807). Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20160304072732/http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/en/article/john-mccrae/)
from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 June 2014.
344. "Monumental Undertaking" (http://www.kclibrary.org/blog/week-kansas-city-history/monumental-un
dertaking). kclibrary.org. 21 September 2015. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150529002
033/http://www.kclibrary.org/blog/week-kansas-city-history/monumental-undertaking) from the
original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015.
345. "Commemoration website" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140208062818/http://www.1914.org/).
1914.org. Archived from the original (http://www.1914.org) on 8 February 2014. Retrieved
28 February 2014.
346. "French, German Presidents Mark World War I Anniversary" (https://www.francenews.net/news/22
4398825/french-german-presidents-mark-world-war-i-anniversary). France News.Net. Archived (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20170403005503/http://www.francenews.net/news/224398825/french-g
erman-presidents-mark-world-war-i-anniversary) from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved
3 August 2014.
347. "Armistice Day: Macron and Merkel mark end of World War One" (https://www.bbc.com/news/worl
d-europe-46165903). BBC News. 10 November 2018. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2020
1210194001/https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-46165903) from the original on 10
December 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2021.
348. Wilfred Owen: poems, 1917, (Faber and Faber, 2004)
349. Neiberg, Michael (2007). The World War I Reader. p. 1.
350. "The intro the outbreak of the First World War" (https://www.cambridgeblog.org/2014/07/into-the-in
tro-the-outbreak-of-the-first-world-war/#:~:text=As%20George%20Kennan%20remarked%2C%20t
he,catastrophe%E2%80%9D%20of%20the%20twentieth%20century.). Cambridge Blog. 2014.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20221117060600/https://www.cambridgeblog.org/2014/07/in
to-the-intro-the-outbreak-of-the-first-world-war/#:~:text=As%20George%20Kennan%20remarked%
2C%20the,catastrophe%E2%80%9D%20of%20the%20twentieth%20century.) from the original on
17 November 2022. Retrieved 17 November 2022.
351. Jones, Heather (2013). "As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War
historiography" (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0018246X13000216). Historical Journal. 56 (3): 857–
878 [858]. doi:10.1017/S0018246X13000216 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0018246X13000216).
352. see Christoph Cornelissen, and Arndt Weinrich, eds. Writing the Great War – The Historiography
of World War I from 1918 to the Present (2020) free download (https://www.berghahnbooks.com/tit
le/CornelissenWriting) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20201129075020/https://berghahnbo
oks.com/title/CornelissenWriting) 29 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine; full coverage for
major countries.
Axelrod, Alan (2018). How America Won World War I. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4930-
3192-4.
Bibliography
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 52/59
Ayers, Leonard Porter (1919). The War with Germany: A Statistical Summary (https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=OCLC01187647&pg=PA1111). Government Printing Office.
Ball, Alan M. (1994). And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–
1930 (https://archive.org/details/andnowmysoulisha00alan/mode/2up?view=theater). Berkeley:
University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-08010-6.
Barrett, Michael B (2013). Prelude to Blitzkrieg: The 1916 Austro-German Campaign in Romania.
Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-00865-7.
Beckett, Ian (2007). The Great War. Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-1252-8.
Béla, Köpeczi (1998). History of Transylvania. Akadémiai Kiadó. ISBN 978-84-8371-020-3.
Braybon, Gail (2004). Evidence, History, and the Great War: Historians and the Impact of 1914–18
(https://books.google.com/books?id=hFqZcQmlOBsC&pg=PA8). Berghahn Books. p. 8. ISBN 978-
1-57181-801-0. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083935/https://books.google.com/
books?id=hFqZcQmlOBsC&pg=PA8#v=onepage&q&f=false) from the original on 17 February
2024. Retrieved 5 July 2020.
Brown, Judith M. (1994). Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy. Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873113-9.
Butcher, Tim (2014). The Trigger: Hunting the Assassin Who Brought the World to War (2015 ed.).
Vintage. ISBN 978-0-09-958133-8.
Christie, Norm M (1997). The Canadians at Cambrai and the Canal du Nord, August–September
1918. CEF Books. ISBN 978-1-896979-18-2.
Clayton, Anthony (2003). Paths of Glory; the French Army 1914–1918. Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-
35949-3.
Clark, Charles Upson (1927). Bessarabia, Russia and Roumania on the Black Sea (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20191008231407/http://depts.washington.edu/cartah/text_archive/clark/meta_pag.s
html). New York: Dodd, Mead. OCLC 150789848 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/150789848).
Archived from the original (http://depts.washington.edu/cartah/text_archive/clark/meta_pag.shtml)
on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2008.
Clark, Christopher (2013). The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914 (https://archive.or
g/details/isbn_9780061146657). HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-219922-5.
Conlon, Joseph M. The historical impact of epidemic typhus (https://web.archive.org/web/2010061
1213940/http://entomology.montana.edu/historybug/TYPHUS-Conlon.pdf) (PDF). Montana State
University. Archived from the original (http://entomology.montana.edu/historybug/TYPHUS-Conlon.
pdf) (PDF) on 11 June 2010. Retrieved 21 April 2009.
Coogan, Tim (2009). Ireland in the 20th Century. Random House. ISBN 978-0-09-941522-0.
Crampton, R. J. (1994). Eastern Europe in the twentieth century. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-
05346-4.
Crisp, Olga (1976). Studies in the Russian Economy before 1914. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-
0-333-16907-0.
Cross, Wilbur L. (1991). Zeppelins of World War I. New York: Paragon Press. ISBN 978-1-55778-
382-0. OCLC 22860189 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/22860189).
Crowe, David (2001). The Essentials of European History: 1914 to 1935, World War I and Europe
in crisis (https://books.google.com/books?id=ONDZngEACAAJ). Research and Education
Association. ISBN 978-0-87891-710-5. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083933/htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=ONDZngEACAAJ) from the original on 17 February 2024.
Retrieved 5 July 2020.
DiNardo, Richard (2015). Invasion: The Conquest of Serbia, 1915. Santa Barbara, California:
Praeger. ISBN 978-1-4408-0092-4.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 53/59
Donko, Wilhelm (2012). A Brief History of the Austrian Navy. epubli GmbH. ISBN 978-3-8442-
2129-9.
Doughty, Robert A. (2005). Pyrrhic victory: French strategy and operations in the Great War (http
s://books.google.com/books?id=vZRmHkdGk44C). Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-
01880-8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240217083949/https://books.google.com/book
s?id=vZRmHkdGk44C) from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 5 July 2020.
Dumitru, Laurentiu-Cristian (2012). "Preliminaries of Romania's entering the World War I" (https://r
evista.unap.ro/index.php/bulletin/article/view/163-172/0). Bulletin of "Carol I" National Defence
University, Bucharest. 1. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220319091440/https://revista.un
ap.ro/index.php/bulletin/article/view/163-172/0) from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved
14 March 2022.
Dupuy, R. Ernest and Trevor N. (1993). The Harper's Encyclopedia of Military History (https://archi
ve.org/details/harperencycloped0000dupu) (4th ed.). Harper Collins Publishers. ISBN 978-0-06-
270056-8.
Erickson, Edward J. (2001). Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War.
Contributions in Military Studies. Vol. 201. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-
313-31516-9. OCLC 43481698 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/43481698).
Falls, Cyril Bentham (1960). The First World War. London: Longmans. ISBN 978-1-84342-272-3.
OCLC 460327352 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/460327352).
Farwell, Byron (1989). The Great War in Africa, 1914–1918. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-30564-
7.
Fay, Sidney B (1930). The Origins of the World War; Volume I (2nd ed.).
Ferguson, Niall (1999). The Pity of War. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-05711-5.
OCLC 41124439 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/41124439).
Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the
West. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-100-4.
Finestone, Jeffrey; Massie, Robert K. (1981). The last courts of Europe. JM Dent & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-460-04519-3.
Fornassin, Alessio (2017). "The Italian Army's Losses in the First World War". Population. 72 (1):
39–62. doi:10.3917/popu.1701.0039 (https://doi.org/10.3917%2Fpopu.1701.0039).
Fromkin, David (1989). A Peace to End All Peace: The Fall of the Ottoman Empire and the
Creation of the Modern Middle East. New York: Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-0857-9.
Fromkin, David (2004). Europe's Last Summer: Who Started the Great War in 1914?. Alfred A.
Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41156-4. OCLC 53937943 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/53937943).
Gardner, Hall (2015). The Failure to Prevent World War I: The Unexpected Armageddon.
Routledge. ISBN 978-1-4724-3056-4.
Grant, R.G. (2005). Battle: A Visual Journey Through 5,000 Years of Combat (https://archive.org/d
etails/battlevisualjour0000gran). DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7566-5578-5.
Gray, Randal; Argyle, Christopher (1990). Chronicle of the First World War. New York: Facts on
File. ISBN 978-0-8160-2595-4. OCLC 19398100 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/19398100).
Gilbert, Martin (1994). First World War. Stoddart Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7737-2848-6.
Goodspeed, Donald James (1985). The German Wars 1914–1945. New York: Random House;
Bonanza. ISBN 978-0-517-46790-9.
Gray, Randal (1991). Kaiserschlacht 1918: the final German offensive. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-
85532-157-1.
Green, John Frederick Norman (1938). "Obituary: Albert Ernest Kitson". Geological Society
Quarterly Journal. 94.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 54/59
Grotelueschen, Mark Ethan (2006). The AEF Way of War: The American Army and Combat in
World War I. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86434-3.
Halpern, Paul G. (1995). A Naval History of World War I. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-
85728-498-0. OCLC 60281302 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/60281302).
Hammond's Frontier Atlas of the World War (https://archive.org/details/hammondsfrontier00csha/p
age/n4). C. S. Hammond & Company. 1916.
Harris, J.P. (2008). Douglas Haig and the First World War (2009 ed.). CUP. ISBN 978-0-521-
89802-7.
Hartcup, Guy (1988). The War of Invention; Scientific Developments, 1914–18. Brassey's Defence
Publishers. ISBN 978-0-08-033591-9.
Havighurst, Alfred F. (1985). Britain in transition: the twentieth century (4th ed.). University of
Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-31971-1.
Herwig, Holger (1988). "The Failure of German Sea Power, 1914–1945: Mahan, Tirpitz, and
Raeder Reconsidered". The International History Review. 10 (1): 68–105.
doi:10.1080/07075332.1988.9640469 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F07075332.1988.9640469).
JSTOR 40107090 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/40107090).
Heyman, Neil M. (1997). World War I (https://archive.org/details/worldwari00heym). Guides to
historic events of the twentieth century. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-
313-29880-6. OCLC 36292837 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/36292837).
Hinterhoff, Eugene (1984). "The Campaign in Armenia". In Young, Peter (ed.). Marshall Cavendish
Illustrated Encyclopedia of World War I. Vol. ii. New York: Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-86307-
181-2.
Holmes, T.M. (April 2014). "Absolute Numbers: The Schlieffen Plan as a Critique of German
Strategy in 1914". War in History. XXI (2): 194, 211. ISSN 1477-0385 (https://www.worldcat.org/iss
n/1477-0385).
Horne, Alistair (1964). The Price of Glory (1993 ed.). Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-017041-2.
Howard, N.P. (1993). "The Social and Political Consequences of the Allied Food Blockade of
Germany, 1918–19". German History. 11 (2): 161–188. doi:10.1093/gh/11.2.161 (https://doi.org/1
0.1093%2Fgh%2F11.2.161).
Humphries, Mark Osborne (2007). " "Old Wine in New Bottles": A Comparison of British and
Canadian Preparations for the Battle of Arras". In Hayes, Geoffrey; Iarocci, Andrew; Bechthold,
Mike (eds.). Vimy Ridge: A Canadian Reassessment. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
ISBN 978-0-88920-508-6.
Inglis, David (1995). Vimy Ridge: 1917–1992, A Canadian Myth over Seventy Five Years (http://su
mmit.sfu.ca/system/files/iritems1/6687/b17448906.pdf) (PDF). Burnaby: Simon Fraser University.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180916183818/http://summit.sfu.ca/system/files/iritems1/
6687/b17448906.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2013.
Jackson, Julian (2018). A Certain Idea of France: The Life of Charles de Gaulle. Allen Lane.
ISBN 978-1-84614-351-9.
Jelavich, Barbara (1992). "Romania in the First World War: The Pre-War Crisis, 1912–1914". The
International History Review. 14 (3): 441–451. doi:10.1080/07075332.1992.9640619 (https://doi.or
g/10.1080%2F07075332.1992.9640619). JSTOR 40106597 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4010659
7).
Jones, Howard (2001). Crucible of Power: A History of US Foreign Relations Since 1897.
Scholarly Resources Books. ISBN 978-0-8420-2918-6. OCLC 46640675 (https://www.worldcat.or
g/oclc/46640675).
Karp, Walter (1979). The Politics of War. Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-012265-2.
OCLC 4593327 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/4593327).
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 55/59
Keegan, John (1998). The First World War. Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-180178-6.
Keenan, George (1986). The Fateful Alliance: France, Russia and the Coming of the First World
War. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-1707-0.
Keene, Jennifer D (2006). World War I. Daily Life Through History Series. Westport, Connecticut:
Greenwood Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-313-33181-7. OCLC 70883191 (https://www.worldcat.org/ocl
c/70883191).
Kernek, Sterling (December 1970). "The British Government's Reactions to President Wilson's
'Peace' Note of December 1916". The Historical Journal. 13 (4): 721–766.
doi:10.1017/S0018246X00009481 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0018246X00009481).
JSTOR 2637713 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2637713). S2CID 159979098 (https://api.semanticsc
holar.org/CorpusID:159979098).
Kitchen, Martin (2000) [1980]. Europe Between the Wars. New York: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-
41869-1. OCLC 247285240 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/247285240).
Knobler, S. L.; Mack, A.; Mahmoud, A.; Lemon, S. M., eds. (2005). The Threat of Pandemic
Influenza: Are We Ready? Workshop Summary. Contributors: Institute of Medicine; Board on
Global Health; Forum on Microbial Threats. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
doi:10.17226/11150 (https://doi.org/10.17226%2F11150). ISBN 978-0-309-09504-4.
OCLC 57422232 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/57422232). PMID 20669448 (https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/20669448).
Lehmann, Hartmut; van der Veer, Peter, eds. (1999). Nation and religion: perspectives on Europe
and Asia. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01232-2.
OCLC 39727826 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/39727826).
Lieven, Dominic (2016). Towards the Flame: Empire, War and the End of Tsarist Russia. Penguin.
ISBN 978-0-14-139974-4.
Love, Dave (May 1996). "The Second Battle of Ypres, April 1915" (http://www.worldwar1.com/sf2y
pres.htm). Sabretache. 26 (4). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180916183801/http://www.
worldwar1.com/sf2ypres.htm) from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 20 November
2009.
MacMillan, Margaret (2013). The War That Ended Peace: The Road to 1914. Profile Books.
ISBN 978-0-8129-9470-4.
Magliveras, Konstantinos D. (1999). Exclusion from Participation in International Organisations:
The Law and Practice behind Member States' Expulsion and Suspension of Membership.
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1239-2.
Marks, Sally (1978). "The Myths of Reparations". Central European History. 11 (3): 231–255.
doi:10.1017/S0008938900018707 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0008938900018707).
S2CID 144072556 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:144072556).
Martel, Gordon (2014). The Month that Changed the World: July 1914. OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-
966538-9.
Marshall, S. L. A.; Josephy, Alvin M. (1982). The American heritage history of World War I (https://
archive.org/details/americanheritage00mars). American Heritage Pub. Co. : Bonanza Books :
Distributed by Crown Publishers. ISBN 978-0-517-38555-5. OCLC 1028047398 (https://www.world
cat.org/oclc/1028047398).
McLellan, Edwin N. The United States Marine Corps in the World War (http://www.ibiblio.org/hyper
war/AMH/XX/WWI/USMC/USMC-WWI.html#XIV). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018091
6183800/http://www.ibiblio.org/hyperwar/AMH/XX/WWI/USMC/USMC-WWI.html#XIV) from the
original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 26 October 2009.
McMeekin, Sean (2014). July 1914: Countdown to War. Icon Books. ISBN 978-1-84831-657-7.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 56/59
McMeekin, Sean (2015). The Ottoman Endgame: War, Revolution and the Making of the Modern
Middle East, 1908–1923 (2016 ed.). Penguin. ISBN 978-0-7181-9971-5.
Medlicott, W.N. (1945). "Bismarck and the Three Emperors' Alliance, 1881–87". Transactions of
the Royal Historical Society. 27: 61–83. doi:10.2307/3678575 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F367857
5). JSTOR 3678575 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3678575). S2CID 154285570 (https://api.semanti
cscholar.org/CorpusID:154285570).
Meyer, Gerald J (2006). A World Undone: The Story of the Great War 1914 to 1918 (https://archiv
e.org/details/worldundonestory00gjme). Random House. ISBN 978-0-553-80354-9.
Moll, Kendall D; Luebbert, Gregory M (1980). "Arms Race and Military Expenditure Models: A
Review". The Journal of Conflict Resolution. 24 (1): 153–185. doi:10.1177/002200278002400107
(https://doi.org/10.1177%2F002200278002400107). JSTOR 173938 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1
73938). S2CID 155405415 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:155405415).
Neiberg, Michael S. (2005). Fighting the Great War: A Global History. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01696-5. OCLC 56592292 (https://www.worldcat.org/o
clc/56592292).
Northedge, F.S. (1986). The League of Nations: Its Life and Times, 1920–1946. New York: Holmes
& Meier. ISBN 978-0-7185-1316-0.
Phillimore, George Grenville; Bellot, Hugh H.L. (1919). "Treatment of Prisoners of War".
Transactions of the Grotius Society. 5: 47–64. OCLC 43267276 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/432
67276).
Price, Alfred (1980). Aircraft versus Submarine: the Evolution of the Anti-submarine Aircraft, 1912
to 1980. London: Jane's Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7106-0008-0. OCLC 10324173 (https://www.worl
dcat.org/oclc/10324173). Deals with technical developments, including the first dipping
hydrophones
Raudzens, George (October 1990). "War-Winning Weapons: The Measurement of Technological
Determinism in Military History". The Journal of Military History. 54 (4): 403–434.
doi:10.2307/1986064 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1986064). JSTOR 1986064 (https://www.jstor.or
g/stable/1986064).
Rickard, J. (5 March 2001). "Erich von Ludendorff [sic], 1865–1937, German General" (http://www.
historyofwar.org/articles/people_ludendorff.html). Military History Encyclopedia on the Web.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20080110050355/http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/peopl
e_ludendorff.html) from the original on 10 January 2008. Retrieved 6 February 2008.
Rickard, J. (27 August 2007). "The Ludendorff Offensives, 21 March–18 July 1918" (http://www.his
toryofwar.org/scripts/fluffy/fcp.pl?words=20+July+1918&d=/battles_ludendorff.html).
historyofwar.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010071517/http://www.historyofwar.
org/scripts/fluffy/fcp.pl?words=20+July+1918&d=%2Fbattles_ludendorff.html) from the original on
10 October 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2018.
Rothschild, Joseph (1975). East-Central Europe between the Two World Wars. University of
Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-95350-2.
Saadi, Abdul-Ilah (12 February 2009). "Dreaming of Greater Syria" (http://english.aljazeera.net/foc
us/arabunity/2008/02/2008525183842614205.html). Al Jazeera. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20110513110319/http://english.aljazeera.net/focus/arabunity/2008/02/200852518384261420
5.html) from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
Sachar, Howard Morley (1970). The emergence of the Middle East, 1914–1924 (https://archive.or
g/details/emergenceofmiddl0000sach). Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-0158-0. OCLC 153103197
(https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/153103197).
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 57/59
Schindler, J. (2003). "Steamrollered in Galicia: The Austro-Hungarian Army and the Brusilov
Offensive, 1916". War in History. 10 (1): 27–59. doi:10.1191/0968344503wh260oa (https://doi.org/
10.1191%2F0968344503wh260oa). S2CID 143618581 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
143618581).
Schindler, John R. (2002). "Disaster on the Drina: The Austro-Hungarian Army in Serbia, 1914".
War in History. 9 (2): 159–195. doi:10.1191/0968344502wh250oa (https://doi.org/10.1191%2F096
8344502wh250oa). S2CID 145488166 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:145488166).
Shapiro, Fred R.; Epstein, Joseph (2006). The Yale Book of Quotations (https://archive.org/details/
isbn_9780300107982). Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10798-2.
Smith, David James (2010). One Morning in Sarajevo (https://books.google.com/books?id=GzsnS
U9J5sAC). Hachette UK. ISBN 978-0-297-85608-5. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/202312
07124130/https://books.google.com/books?id=GzsnSU9J5sAC) from the original on 7 December
2023. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "He was photographed on the way to the station and the photograph
has been reproduced many times in books and articles, claiming to depict the arrest of Gavrilo
Princip. But there is no photograph of Gavro's arrest—this photograph shows the arrest of Behr."
Souter, Gavin (2000). Lion & Kangaroo: the initiation of Australia. Melbourne: Text Publishing.
OCLC 222801639 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/222801639).
Smele, Jonathan. "War and Revolution in Russia 1914–1921" (https://www.bbc.co.uk/history/world
wars/wwone/eastern_front_01.shtml). World Wars in-depth. BBC. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20111023214328/http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/eastern_front_01.shtml)
from the original on 23 October 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2009.
Spreeuwenberg, P (2018). "Reassessing the Global Mortality Burden of the 1918 Influenza
Pandemic" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7314216). American Journal of
Epidemiology. 187 (12): 2561–2567. doi:10.1093/aje/kwy191 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Faje%2Fk
wy191). PMC 7314216 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7314216). PMID 30202996
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30202996).
Stevenson, David (1988). The First World War and International Politics. Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-873049-1.
Stevenson, David (1996). Armaments and the Coming of War: Europe, 1904–1914. New York:
Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820208-0. OCLC 33079190 (https://www.worldcat.org/ocl
c/33079190).
Stevenson, David (2004). Cataclysm: The First World War as Political Tragedy. New York: Basic
Books. p. 560. ISBN 978-0-465-08184-4. OCLC 54001282 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/540012
82).
Stevenson, David (2012). 1914–1918: The History of the First World War. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-
7181-9795-7.
Stevenson, David (2016). Mahnken, Thomas (ed.). Land armaments in Europe, 1866–1914 in
Arms Races in International Politics: From the Nineteenth to the Twenty-First Century. Oxford
University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873526-7.
Strachan, Hew (2003). The First World War: Volume I: To Arms. New York: Viking. ISBN 978-0-
670-03295-2. OCLC 53075929 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/53075929).
Taliaferro, William Hay (1972) [1944]. Medicine and the War. Books for Libraries Press. ISBN 978-
0-8369-2629-3.
Taylor, John M. (Summer 2007). "Audacious Cruise of the Emden" (https://www.historynet.com/au
dacious-cruise-of-the-emden.htm). The Quarterly Journal of Military History. 19 (4): 38–47.
ISSN 0899-3718 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0899-3718). Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20210814021234/https://www.historynet.com/audacious-cruise-of-the-emden.htm) from the
original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 5 July 2021.
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 58/59
Thompson, Mark (2009). The White War: Life and Death on the Italian Front, 1915–1919. Faber &
Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-22333-6.
Tomasevich, Jozo (2001). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia: 1941–1945 (https://books.google.co
m/books?id=fqUSGevFe5MC&pg=PA485). Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7924-1.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20140104165249/http://books.google.com/books?id=fqUSG
evFe5MC&pg=PA485) from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2013.
Torrie, Glenn E. (1978). "Romania's Entry into the First World War: The Problem of Strategy" (http
s://esirc.emporia.edu/bitstream/handle/123456789/311/136.pdf?sequence=1) (PDF). Emporia
State Research Studies. Emporia State University. 26 (4): 7–8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20190810055824/https://esirc.emporia.edu/bitstream/handle/123456789/311/136.pdf?sequenc
e=1) (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2022.
Tschanz, David W. Typhus fever on the Eastern front in World War I (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0100611212917/http://entomology.montana.edu/historybug/WWI/TEF.htm). Montana State
University. Archived from the original (http://www.entomology.montana.edu/historybug/WWI/TEF.ht
m) on 11 June 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2009.
Tucker, Spencer C.; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2005). Encyclopedia of World War I. Santa Barbara:
ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2. OCLC 61247250 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/61247250).
Tucker, Spencer C.; Wood, Laura Matysek; Murphy, Justin D. (1999). The European powers in the
First World War: an encyclopedia (https://books.google.com/books?id=gv3GEyB19wIC). Taylor &
Francis. ISBN 978-0-8153-3351-7. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200801142143/https://
books.google.com/books?id=gv3GEyB19wIC) from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved
6 June 2020.
Tucker, Spencer (2002). The Great War, 1914–1918. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-81750-4.
Velikonja, Mitja (2003). Religious Separation and Political Intolerance in Bosnia-Herzegovina (http
s://archive.org/details/religiousseparat0000veli/page/141). Texas A&M University Press. p. 141 (htt
ps://archive.org/details/religiousseparat0000veli/page/141). ISBN 978-1-58544-226-3.
von der Porten, Edward P. (1969). German Navy in World War II (https://archive.org/details/germa
nnavyinworl00vond). New York: T.Y. Crowell. ISBN 978-0-213-17961-8. OCLC 164543865 (https://
www.worldcat.org/oclc/164543865).
Westwell, Ian (2004). World War I Day by Day. St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Publishing. pp. 192pp.
ISBN 978-0-7603-1937-6. OCLC 57533366 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/57533366).
Wheeler-Bennett, John W. (1938). Brest-Litovsk:The forgotten peace. Macmillan.
Willmott, H.P. (2003). World War I. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-7894-9627-0. OCLC 52541937
(https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/52541937).
Winter, Jay, ed. (2014). The Cambridge History of the First World War (2016 ed.). Cambridge
University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-60066-5.
Zeldin, Theodore (1977). France, 1848–1945: Volume II: Intellect, Taste, and Anxiety (1986 ed.).
Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822125-8.
Zieger, Robert H. (2001). America's Great War: World War I and the American experience.
Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9645-1.
Links to other WWI Sites (https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/Links_to_Other_WWI_Sites),
worldwide links from Brigham Young U.
The World War One Document Archive (https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/), from Brigham Young U.
International Encyclopedia of the First World War (http://www.1914-1918-online.net/#:~:text=Intern
ational%20Encyclopedia%20of%20the%20First%20World%20War%20%E2%80%9D,authors%2
External links
2/24/24, 2:25 PM World War I - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I 59/59
C%20editors%2C%20and%20partners%20from%20over%20fifty%20countries.)
Records on the outbreak of World War I from the UK Parliamentary Collections (https://www.parlia
ment.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/private-lives/yourcountry/collections/the-outbrea
k-of-the-first-world-war/)
The Heritage of the Great War / First World War. Graphic color photos, pictures and music (http://
www.greatwar.nl/)
A multimedia history of World War I (http://www.firstworldwar.com/)
European Newspapers from the start of the First World War (https://www.theeuropeanlibrary.org/te
l4/newspapers/search?query=&decade=1910-1919&month=7&year=1914&&count=50) and the
end of the war (https://www.theeuropeanlibrary.org/tel4/newspapers/search?query=&decade=191
0-1919&month=11&year=1918&count=50)
WWI Films on the European Film Gateway (http://www.europeanfilmgateway.eu/node/33/efg1914/
multilingual%3A1)
The British Pathé WW1 Film Archive (http://www.britishpathe.com/workspaces/page/ww1-the-defin
itive-collection) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190324234810/http://www.britishpathe.co
m/workspaces/page/ww1-the-definitive-collection) 24 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine
World War I British press photograph collection (http://digitalcollections.library.ubc.ca/cdm/landing
page/collection/WWIphoto) – A sampling of images distributed by the British government during
the war to diplomats overseas, from the UBC Library Digital Collections
Personal accounts of American World War I veterans (http://memory.loc.gov/diglib/vhp/search?que
ry=&field=all&war=worldwari), Veterans History Project, Library of Congress
National Library of New Zealand (http://natlib.govt.nz/researchers/guides/first-world-war)
State Library of New South Wales (http://guides.sl.nsw.gov.au/wwi-and-australia)
US Library of Congress (https://www.loc.gov/rr/program/bib/wwi/wwi.html)
Indiana University Bloomington (http://libraries.iub.edu/guide-world-war-i-resources) Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20150605065400/http://libraries.iub.edu/guide-world-war-i-resources) 5
June 2015 at the Wayback Machine
New York University (http://guides.nyu.edu/content.php?pid=568692) Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20150405020007/http://guides.nyu.edu/content.php?pid=568692) 5 April 2015 at the
Wayback Machine
University of Alberta (https://web.archive.org/web/20141020223852/http://guides.library.ualberta.c
a/worldwar1914)
California State Library, California History Room. Collection: California. State Council of Defense.
California War History Committee. Records of Californians who served in World War I, 1918–
1922. (https://oac.cdlib.org/search?style=oac4;Institution=California%20State%20Library::Californi
a%20History%20Room;idT=AEK-6409)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_War_I&oldid=1209800009"
Library guides